--- Page 1 ---
THE IMPACTS OF NEIGHBORHOODS ON
INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II: COUNTY-LEVEL
ESTIMATES∗
RAJ CHETTY AND NATHANIEL HENDREN
We estimate the causal effect of each county in the United States on children’s
incomes in adulthood. We ﬁrst estimate a ﬁxed effects model that is identiﬁed by
analyzing families who move across counties with children of different ages. We
then use these ﬁxed effect estimates to (i) quantify how much places matter for in-
tergenerational mobility, (ii) construct forecasts of the causal effect of growing up
in each county that can be used to guide families seeking to move to opportunity,
and (iii) characterize which types of areas produce better outcomes. For children
growing up in low-income families, each year of childhood exposure to a one stan-
dard deviation (std. dev.) better county increases income in adulthood by 0.5%.
There is substantial variation in counties’ causal effects even within metro areas.
Counties with less concentrated poverty, less income inequality, better schools, a
larger share of two-parent families, and lower crime rates tend to produce better
outcomes for children in poor families. Boys’ outcomes vary more across areas than
girls’ outcomes, and boys have especially negative outcomes in highly segregated
areas. Areas that generate better outcomes have higher house prices on average,
but our approach uncovers many “opportunity bargains”—places that generate
good outcomes but are not very expensive. JEL Codes: J62, C00, R00.
∗An earlier version of this article was circulated as the second part of the
article, “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility: Childhood
Exposure Effects and County Level Estimates.” The opinions expressed in this
article are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of
the Internal Revenue Service or the U.S. Treasury Department. This work is a
component of a larger project examining the effects of tax expenditures on the
budget deﬁcit and economic activity. All results based on tax data in this article
are constructed using statistics originally reported in the SOI Working Paper
“The Economic Impacts of Tax Expenditures: Evidence from Spatial Variation
across the U.S.,” approved under IRS contract TIRNO-12-P-00374. We thank Gary
Chamberlain, Maximilian Kasy, Lawrence Katz, Jesse Shapiro, and numerous
seminar participants for helpful comments and discussions. Sarah Abraham, Alex
Bell, Augustin Bergeron, Michael Droste, Niklas Flamang, Jamie Fogel, Robert
Fluegge, Nikolaus Hildebrand, Alex Olssen, Jordan Richmond, Benjamin Scuderi,
Priyanka Shende, and our other predoctoral fellows provided outstanding research
assistance. This research was funded by the National Science Foundation, the Lab
for Economic Applications and Policy at Harvard, Stanford University, and the
Laura and John Arnold Foundation.
C⃝The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Pres-
ident and Fellows of Harvard College. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com
The Quarterly Journal of Economics (2018), 1163–1228. doi:10.1093/qje/qjy006.
Advance Access publication on February 10, 2018.
1163
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 2 ---
1164
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
I. INTRODUCTION
How are children’s economic opportunities shaped by the
neighborhoods in which they grow up? In the ﬁrst article in this
series (Chetty and Hendren 2018a), we showed that neighbor-
hoods have signiﬁcant childhood exposure effects on children’s
life outcomes. Although those results establish that place matters
for intergenerational mobility, they do not tell us which areas pro-
duce the best outcomes, nor do they identify the characteristics of
neighborhoods that generate good outcomes—two key inputs nec-
essary for developing place-focused policies to improve children’s
outcomes.
In this article, we build on the exposure-time design devel-
oped in our ﬁrst article to estimate the causal effect of each county
in the United States on children’s incomes in adulthood. Formally,
our ﬁrst article identiﬁed one treatment effect—the average im-
pact of exposure to an area where children have better outcomes—
while this article pursues the more ambitious goal of identifying
(approximately) 3,000 treatment effects, one for each county in
the country.1
We estimate counties’ causal effects on children’s ranks in the
income distribution at age 26 using data from deidentiﬁed tax re-
turns for all children born between 1980 and 1986.2 We estimate
each county’s effect using a ﬁxed effects regression model iden-
tiﬁed by analyzing families who move across counties, exploiting
variation in children’s ages when families move. To understand
how the model is identiﬁed, consider families in the New York
area. If children who move from Manhattan to Queens at younger
ages earn more as adults, we can infer that growing up in Queens
has a positive causal effect relative to growing up in Manhat-
tan under the assumption that other determinants of children’s
1. To maximize statistical precision, we characterize neighborhood (or “place”)
effects at the county level. We recognize that counties are much larger than the
typical geographic units used to deﬁne “neighborhoods.” In the presence of het-
erogeneity across local areas within counties, the county-level effects we estimate
can be interpreted as weighted averages of the local area effects. In future work,
the methods we develop here could be applied to estimate place effects at smaller
geographies, such as census tracts.
2. We measure incomes at age 26 because children’s mean ranks in each area
tend to stabilize by age 26. For example, the (population-weighted) correlation
between mean income ranks at age 26 and age 32 across commuting zones is
0.93 for children growing up in low-income (25th percentile) families and 0.77 for
children growing up in high-income (75th percentile) families.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 3 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1165
outcomes are unrelated to the age at which they move. Building
on this logic, we use our sample of cross-county movers to regress
children’s income ranks at age 26 on ﬁxed effects for each county
interacted with the fraction of childhood spent in that county.
We estimate the county ﬁxed effects separately by parent income
level, permitting the effects of each area to vary with parent in-
come. We include origin-by-destination ﬁxed effects when estimat-
ing this model, so that each county’s effect is identiﬁed purely from
variation in the age of children when families make a given move
rather than variation in where families move.
The key assumption required to identify counties’ causal ef-
fects using this research design is that children’s potential out-
comes are orthogonal to the age at which they move to a given
county. This assumption is motivated by the evidence in our ﬁrst
article showing that the age at which children move to an area
where permanent residents (nonmovers) have better or worse out-
comes on average is orthogonal to their potential outcomes. How-
ever, it is a stronger requirement than the condition required to
identify average exposure effects in our ﬁrst article because it
imposes 3,000 orthogonality conditions—one for each county—
rather than a single orthogonality condition that must hold on
average.
We assess the validity of this stronger identiﬁcation assump-
tion using two approaches. First, we show that controlling for
parental income levels and marital status in the years before and
after the move, which are strong predictors of children’s outcomes,
does not affect the estimates, supporting the view that our esti-
mates are not confounded by selection on other determinants of
children’s outcomes. Second, we implement placebo tests by (i)
estimating each area’s ﬁxed effect on teenage labor force partici-
pation rates at age 16 (a strong predictor of incomes in adulthood),
using the subsample of families who move after age 16; and (ii)
estimating each area’s effect on income at age 26 using parents
who move after their children turn 23, the point at which neigh-
borhood exposure no longer appears to affect children’s outcomes
based on the evidence in our ﬁrst article. These placebo ﬁxed effect
estimates are uncorrelated with our baseline estimates, support-
ing the assumption that the time at which parents move to a given
county is orthogonal to their children’s potential outcomes.
We use the estimates of counties’ causal effects for three pur-
poses. First, we quantify how much neighborhoods matter for chil-
dren’s incomes. We model the estimated county effects as the sum
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 4 ---
1166
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
of a latent causal effect and noise due to sampling error and es-
timate the signal variance of the latent causal effects. For a child
with parents at the 25th percentile of the national income dis-
tribution, we ﬁnd that spending one additional year of childhood
in a one standard deviation better county (population-weighted)
increases household income at age 26 by 0.17 percentile points,
equivalent to an increase in mean income of approximately 0.5%.
Extrapolating over 20 years of childhood, growing up in a one stan-
dard deviation better county from birth would increase a child’s
household income in adulthood by approximately 10%.3
Neighborhoods have similar effects in percentile rank or dol-
lar terms for children of higher-income parents, but matter less in
percentage terms because children in high-income families have
higher mean incomes. For children with parents at the 75th per-
centile of the income distribution, the signal standard deviation of
annual exposure effects across counties is 0.16 percentiles, which
is approximately 0.3% of mean income. Importantly, areas that
generate better outcomes for children in low-income families also
generate slightly better outcomes on average for children in high-
income families. This result suggests that the success of the poor
does not have to come at the expense of the rich.
In the second part of our analysis, we construct forecasts
of the causal effect of growing up in each county that can be
used to guide families seeking to move to better areas. Formally,
we construct forecasts that minimize the mean squared error
(MSE) of the predicted impact of growing up in a given neigh-
borhood relative to the true impact. Although the raw county
ﬁxed effects provide unbiased estimates of counties’ causal ef-
fects, they do not themselves provide good forecasts because many
of the estimates have substantial noise, leading to high MSE.
In highly populated counties, such as Cook County (the city of
Chicago), nearly 75% of the variance in the ﬁxed effect estimates
is signal; however, in most counties, more than half of the vari-
ance in the ﬁxed effect estimates is due to noise from sampling
variation.
3. We focus primarily on estimates of place effects on household income (in-
cluding spousal income), but also report estimates using individual income below.
The household income estimates are highly correlated with the individual income
estimates for men, whose outcomes are typically used as a measure of economic
opportunities in the literature on intergenerational mobility because the variance
in earnings due to differences in labor force participation rates is smaller for men
than women (e.g., Solon 1999).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 5 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1167
To obtain forecasts that have lower MSE, we use a shrink-
age estimator that incorporates data on the permanent residents’
(nonmovers) outcomes in each area.4 The permanent residents’
mean outcomes have very little sampling error but are imperfect
forecasts of a county’s causal effect because they combine causal
effects with sorting. The best MSE-minimizing linear forecast of
each county’s causal effect is therefore a weighted average of the
ﬁxed effect estimate based on the movers and a prediction based
on permanent residents’ outcomes, with greater weight on the
ﬁxed effect estimate when it is more precisely estimated (i.e., in
large counties).
Among the 100 most populated counties in the country,
DuPage County, IL, is forecasted to generate the highest incomes
for children growing up in low-income (25th percentile) families.
Each additional year that a child in a low-income family spends
in DuPage County instead of the average county in the United
States raises his or her household income in adulthood by 0.80%.
Growing up in DuPage County from birth—that is, having about
20 years of exposure to that environment—would raise such a
child’s income by 16%. In contrast, growing up in Cook County
(one of the lowest-ranking counties in the United States) from
birth reduces a child’s income by approximately 13%. Hence, mov-
ing from Cook County (the city of Chicago) to DuPage County
(the western suburbs) at birth would increase a child’s income by
about 30% on average.5
We ﬁnd that neighborhoods matter more for boys than girls:
the signal standard deviation of county-level effects is roughly
4. Our methodology contributes to a recent literature that builds on empirical
Bayes methods dating to Robbins (1956) by using shrinkage estimators to reduce
MSE (risk) when estimating a large number of parameters. For instance, Angrist
et al. (2017) combine experimental and observational estimates to improve fore-
casts of school value added. Our methodology differs from theirs because we have
unbiased (quasi-experimental) estimates of causal effects for every area, whereas
Angrist et al. have unbiased (experimental) estimates of causal effects for a subset
of schools. Hull (2017) develops methods to forecast hospital quality, permitting
nonlinear and heterogeneous causal effects. Abadie and Kasy (2017) show how ma-
chine learning methods can be used to reduce risk, using the ﬁxed effect estimates
constructed in this article as an application.
5. Interestingly, many families involved in the well-known Gautreaux housing
desegregation project moved from Cook County to DuPage County. Our results
support the view that much of the gains experienced by the children of the families
who moved as part of Gautreaux (Rosenbaum 1995) was due to the causal effect
of exposure to better neighborhoods.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 6 ---
1168
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
60% larger for boys than girls in low-income (25th percentile)
families. The distribution has an especially thick lower tail for
boys, as counties with high concentrations of urban poverty such
as Baltimore City and Wayne County (Detroit) produce especially
negative outcomes for boys.6
Our estimates of the causal effects of counties and commuting
zones (CZs) are highly correlated with the observational statistics
on intergenerational mobility reported in Chetty et al. (2014), as
expected given the ﬁndings in Chetty and Hendren (2018a), but
there are many signiﬁcant differences. For example, children who
grow up in low-income families in New York City have outcomes
comparable to the national mean, but the causal effect of growing
up in New York City—as revealed by analyzing individuals who
move into and out of New York—is well below the national mean.
One potential explanation for this pattern is that New York has a
large share of immigrants, who tend to have high rates of upward
mobility (Hilger 2016). More generally, this example illustrates
the importance of estimating the causal effect of each area directly
using movers (as we do in this article) rather than predicting
neighborhood effects purely from permanent residents’ outcomes.
In the third part of our analysis, we characterize the prop-
erties of CZs and counties that produce good outcomes for low-
income children (i.e., generate high rates of upward mobility).
Prior work has shown that in observational data, upward mobility
is highly correlated with area characteristics, such as residential
segregation, income inequality, social capital, and school quality,
as well as demographic characteristics, such as the fraction of
children being raised by single mothers and racial shares (Wilson
1987; Sampson, Morenoff, and Gannon-Rowley 2002; Chetty et al.
2014). However, it is unclear whether these correlations are driven
by the causal effects of place or selection effects. For instance, is
growing up in a less segregated area beneﬁcial for a given child
or do families who choose to live in less segregated areas simply
have better unobservable characteristics?
We decompose the correlations documented in prior work
into causal versus sorting components by correlating each char-
acteristic with both our causal effect estimates and permanent
6. These gender differences are partly related to differences in rates of mar-
riage. For example, the San Francisco area generates high individual incomes but
relatively low household incomes for girls because growing up in San Francisco
reduces the probability that a child gets married.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 7 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1169
residents’ outcomes, which combine both causal and selection ef-
fects. We ﬁnd that many of the correlations between area-level
characteristics and upward mobility are driven almost entirely
by causal effects of place. For example, 80% of the association
between segregation and upward mobility across CZs in observa-
tional data is driven by the causal effect of place; only 20% is due to
sorting. Growing up in a CZ with a one standard deviation higher
level of segregation from birth reduces the income of a child in a
low-income (25th percentile) family by 5.2%.7 Urban areas, par-
ticularly those with concentrated poverty, generate particularly
negative outcomes for low-income children. These ﬁndings sup-
port the view that growing up in an urban “ghetto” reduces chil-
dren’s prospects for upward mobility (Massey and Denton 1993;
Cutler and Glaeser 1997).
Areas with greater income inequality—as measured by the
Gini coefﬁcient or top 1% income shares—also generate signiﬁ-
cantly worse outcomes for children in low-income families. Hence,
the negative correlation between inequality and intergenerational
mobility documented in prior work—coined the “Great Gatsby
curve” by Krueger (2012) —is not simply driven by differences in
genetics or other characteristics of populations in areas with dif-
ferent levels of inequality. Rather, putting a given child in an area
with higher levels of inequality makes that child less likely to rise
up in the income distribution. The negative correlation between
the causal effects and top 1% shares contrasts with the ﬁndings
of Chetty et al. (2014), who ﬁnd no correlation between top 1%
shares (upper-tail inequality) and rates of upward mobility in ob-
servational data. Our analysis of movers reveals that low-income
families who live in areas with large top 1% shares (such as New
York City) are positively selected, masking the negative associ-
ation between top 1% shares and the causal effect of places on
upward mobility in observational data.
We ﬁnd strong correlations between areas’ causal effects and
output-based measures of school quality, such as test scores ad-
justed for parental income levels. We also ﬁnd strong correlations
between the causal effects and proxies for social capital, such as
crime rates and Rupasingha and Goetz’s (2008) summary index.
7. This result does not necessarily imply that reducing segregation in a given
area will improve children’s outcomes. Other factors associated with less segre-
gation (e.g., better schools) could potentially be responsible for the gain a child
obtains from moving to a less segregated area.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 8 ---
1170
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Selection plays a bigger role in explaining correlations
between demographic characteristics and upward mobility in
observational data. For example, the fraction of single mothers
is the single strongest predictor of differences in upward mobility
for permanent residents across areas. However, the fraction of sin-
gle mothers (although still a signiﬁcant predictor) is less highly
correlated with CZs’ causal effects on upward mobility than other
factors, such as segregation. This is because nearly half of the
association between permanent residents’ outcomes and the frac-
tion of single mothers is due to selection. Similarly, areas with
a larger African American population have signiﬁcantly lower
rates of upward mobility in observational data. Roughly half of
this association is also unrelated to the causal effect of place, con-
sistent with Rothbaum (2016). Nevertheless, the correlation be-
tween the causal effects of place and the African American share
remains substantial (−0.51 across CZs and −0.37 across coun-
ties within CZs). Place effects therefore amplify racial inequality:
black children have worse economic outcomes because they grow
up in worse neighborhoods.
Finally, we examine how much more one has to pay for hous-
ing to live in an area that generates better outcomes for one’s
children. Within CZs, counties that produce better outcomes for
children have slightly higher rents, especially in highly segregated
cities. However, rents explain less than 5% of the variance in coun-
ties’ causal effects for families at the 25th percentile. This result
suggests that current “small area” fair market rent proposals in
housing voucher programs - which condition voucher payments
on local neighborhood rents—may not maximize vouchers’ effects
on upward mobility, as many areas that are more expensive do
not produce better outcomes. Moreover, it shows that some areas
are “opportunity bargains”—counties within a labor market that
offer good outcomes for children without higher rents.8 For exam-
ple, in the New York metro area, Hudson County, NJ, offers much
higher levels of upward mobility than does Manhattan or Queens,
despite having comparable rents during the period we study.
To understand the source of these opportunity bargains, we
divide our causal county effects into the component that projects
8. Of course, the areas that are “opportunity bargains” in rents may come with
other disamenities, such as longer commutes to work, that might make them less
desirable. Our point is simply that housing costs themselves are not necessarily a
barrier to moving to opportunity.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 9 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1171
onto observable area-level factors, such as poverty rates and
school expenditures, and a residual “unobservable” component.
We ﬁnd that only the observable component is capitalized in rents,
suggesting that the opportunity bargains may partly exist be-
cause families do not know which neighborhoods have the highest
value added. This result underscores the importance of measuring
neighborhood quality directly using children’s observed outcomes
instead of using traditional proxies such as poverty rates.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section II,
we summarize the data, focusing on differences relative to the
sample used in our ﬁrst article. In Section III, we formalize our
empirical objectives using a statistical model. Section IV reports
the baseline ﬁxed effect estimates and evaluates the validity of
the key identiﬁcation assumptions. Section V quantiﬁes the mag-
nitude of place effects, Section VI presents the CZ- and county-
level MSE-minimizing forecasts, and Section VII examines the
characteristics of places that generate better outcomes. Section
VIII presents the results on housing costs and opportunity bar-
gains. Section IX concludes. Supplementary results and details
on estimation methodology are provided in an Online Appendix.
Estimates of CZs’ and counties’ causal effects are available on the
Equality of Opportunity Project website.
II. DATA AND SAMPLE DEFINITIONS
We use data from federal income tax records spanning 1996–
2012. Our primary analysis sample is the same as the sample
of movers in Chetty and Hendren (2018a, Section II), with three
exceptions.
First, we limit the sample to children in the 1980–1986 birth
cohorts because we measure children’s incomes at age 26. Mea-
suring children’s incomes at age 26 strikes a balance between the
competing goals of minimizing life cycle bias by measuring income
at a sufﬁciently old age and having an adequate number of birth
cohorts to implement our research design. Among permanent res-
idents (parents who stay in the same CZ from 1996 to 2012) at
the 25th percentile of the income distribution, the population-
weighted correlation between children’s mean ranks at age 26
and age 32 across CZs is 0.93.9 This suggests that measuring
9. The key point here is that children’s average ranks in each area stabilize
by age 26. At the individual level, children’s incomes stabilize later, around age 32
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 10 ---
1172
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
children’s incomes at later ages would not affect our estimates of
places’ causal effects substantially.
Second, we focus on the subset of families who move across
CZs or counties when their child is 23 or younger, motivated by
our ﬁnding that childhood exposure effects persist until age 23.
To simplify estimation, we focus on families who move exactly
once during the sample period, dropping those who move multiple
times. We divide the sample of one-time movers into two groups—
those who move across CZs and those who move across counties
within CZs—and analyze these two sets of movers separately.
Third, to maximize precision, we include all movers, not just
those who move between large CZs in our analysis sample. How-
ever, we only report estimates of causal effects for CZs with popu-
lations above 25,000 and counties with populations above 10,000
in the 2000 census (excluding 0.36% of the population).10
We measure children’s and parents’ incomes at the household
level using data from 1040 forms (for those who ﬁle tax returns)
and W-2 forms (for nonﬁlers), which we label family (or household)
income. We identify individuals’ locations in each year using the
ZIP code from which they ﬁled their tax returns or to which their
W-2 forms were mailed. We also measure a set of additional out-
comes for children, such as individual income, college attendance,
and marriage. All of these variables are deﬁned in the same way
as described in Section II of Chetty and Hendren (2018a).
Table I presents summary statistics for children in our
primary sample who move across CZs (Panel A) and counties
within CZs (Panel B). There are 1,397,260 children whose parents
move once across CZs and 931,138 children whose parents move
across counties within CZs in our primary sample. The sample
(Haider and Solon 2006, ﬁgure 2a). Intuitively, children’s ranks change rapidly in
their late 20s, but these idiosyncratic individual-level changes average out at the
area level, so that areas where children have high ranks at 26 tend to have high
ranks at age 32 as well.
10. In Chetty and Hendren (2018a), we limited our primary sample to CZs
with populations above 250,000 to minimize attenuation bias in exposure effect
estimates resulting from noise in permanent residents’ outcomes. This attenuation
bias does not arise here because we identify causal effects purely from the sample
of movers, without projecting their outcomes onto permanent residents. This is
why we impose lower population restrictions here, providing estimates for a larger
set of CZs. Because our goal is to provide estimates of place effects at the county
(rather than CZ) level, we also do not impose any restrictions on the distance of
moves we examine.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 11 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1173
TABLE I
SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR MOVERS ANALYSIS SAMPLES
Mean
Std. dev.
Median
Sample size
Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Between CZ movers
Parent family income ($)
89,029
353,465
56,700
1,397,260
Child family income at 26 ($)
31,706
88,503
24,300
1,397,260
Child family income at 30 ($)
45,890
99,172
33,100
459,952
Child individual income at 26 ($)
23,731
79,083
19,900
1,397,260
Child married at 26 (%)
26.5
44.1
0.0
1,270,634
Panel B: County within CZ movers
Parent family income ($)
82,627
300,952
57,000
931,138
Child family income at 26 ($)
32,304
62,314
25,000
931,138
Child family income at 30 ($)
46,477
86,911
33,800
316,106
Child individual income at 26 ($)
24,260
49,620
20,700
931,138
Child married at 26 (%)
25.9
43.8
0.0
842,547
Notes. This table presents summary statistics for the primary analysis samples used to estimate the causal
effects of counties and CZs. The sample consists of individuals who (i) have a valid Social Security Number
or Individual Taxpayer Identiﬁcation Number, (ii) were born between 1980 and 1986, (iii) are U.S. citizens as
of 2013, and (iv) were claimed as a child dependent at some point between 1996–2012. Panel A includes the
subset of children satisfying these restrictions whose families moved exactly once across commuting zones
between 1996 and 2012 before they turned 23. Panel B includes children whose families moved across counties
within a CZ exactly once between 1996 and 2012 before they turned 23. Parent family income is the average
pretax household income from 1996 to 2000, measured as AGI plus tax-exempt interest income and the non-
taxable portion of Social Security and Disability (SSDI) beneﬁts for tax-ﬁlers, and using information returns
for nonﬁlers. Child family income is measured analogously at various ages, while child individual income is
deﬁned as the sum of individual W-2 wage earnings, unemployment insurance beneﬁts, SSDI payments, and
half of household self-employment income. See Section II of Chetty and Hendren (2018a) for additional details
on sample and variable deﬁnitions. All dollar values are reported in 2012 dollars, deﬂated using the CPI-U.
characteristics are generally very similar to those reported in Ta-
ble I of Chetty and Hendren (2018a), with a median family income
of $24,253 at age 26 for children in the CZ movers sample and
$24,993 in the county-within-CZ movers sample (in 2012 dollars).
III. EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK
In this section, we deﬁne the estimands we seek to identify
using a statistical model of neighborhood effects. We then describe
the research design we use to identify these parameters and the
key identiﬁcation assumptions underlying our analysis. Finally,
we discuss the empirical speciﬁcation and estimation procedures
we use to implement this research design.
III.A. Statistical Model
We estimate place effects using a statistical model moti-
vated by the childhood exposure effects documented in Chetty and
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 12 ---
1174
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Hendren (2018a). Let yi denote a child’s income (or other out-
come) in adulthood, measured at age T. We model yi as a function
of three factors: the neighborhoods in which the child grows up,
disruption costs of moving across neighborhoods, and all other
non-neighborhood inputs, such as family environment and genet-
ics.
Let c(i, a) denote the place in which child i lives at age a = 1,
..., A of his childhood, where A < T. Let μc denote the causal effect
of one additional year of exposure to place c on the child’s outcome
yi.11 Given the linear childhood exposure effects documented in
Chetty and Hendren (2018a, Figure IV), we assume that the ex-
posure effect μc is constant for ages a ⩽A and is 0 thereafter.
Let κ denote the cost of moving from one neighborhood to another
during childhood (e.g., due to a loss of connections to friends or
other ﬁxed costs of moving). Finally, let θi denote the impact of
other factors, such as family inputs. The parameter θi captures
both time-invariant inputs, such as genetic endowments, and the
total amount of time-varying inputs, such as parental investments
during childhood.
Combining the effects of neighborhoods, disruption effects of
moving, and other factors, the child’s outcome is given by
(1)
yi =
A

a=1

μc(i,a) −κ1 {c (i, a) ̸= c (i, a −1)}
+ θi.
The production function for yi in equation (1) imposes three sub-
stantive restrictions that are relevant for our empirical anal-
ysis. First, it assumes that neighborhood effects μc do not
vary across children (conditional on parent income).12 Second,
11. In our empirical application, we permit place effects μpc to vary with
parental income rank p(i), but we suppress the parental income index in this
section to simplify notation.
12. This constant treatment effects assumption is a common simpliﬁcation in
the literature. For instance, in work on ﬁrm effects and teacher effects (Abowd,
Kramarz, and Margolis 1999; Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff 2014a), analogous
restrictions rule out worker-ﬁrm or teacher-student match effects. Our ﬁxed effect
estimates can be interpreted as mean place effects in the presence of heterogeneous
treatment effects if such heterogeneity is orthogonal to individuals’ transition rates
across areas, that is, as long as there is no “essential” heterogeneity. Understanding
how the present estimates of μpc can be interpreted in the presence of essential
heterogeneity and estimating models that permit richer forms of heterogeneity
are important directions for further work.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 13 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1175
it assumes that place effects are additive and constant across
ages, that is, that there are no complementarities between
neighborhood effects across years. Third, it assumes that the dis-
ruption costs of moving κ do not vary across neighborhoods or the
age of the child at the time of the move.13 We believe these restric-
tions are reasonable approximations given the ﬁndings of our ﬁrst
article, which show that childhood exposure effects are constant
throughout childhood and symmetric when children move to ar-
eas with better or worse permanent resident outcomes on average
(conditional on parent income). Nevertheless, we view estimating
models that permit richer forms of heterogeneity in place effects
as an important direction for future research.14
Our objective in this article is to identify ⃗μ = {μc}, the causal
exposure effect of spending a year of one’s childhood in a given area
(CZ or county) of the United States. One way to identify ⃗μ would
be to randomly assign children of different ages to different places
and compare their outcomes, as in the Moving to Opportunity ex-
periment (Chetty, Hendren, and Katz 2016). Because conducting
such an experiment in all areas of the country is infeasible, we
develop methods of identifying place effects in observational data.
III.B. Identifying Place Effects in Observational Data
Building on the approach in Chetty and Hendren (2018a), we
identify ⃗μ by exploiting variation in the timing of when children
move across areas. To understand the intuition underlying our
approach, consider a set of children who move from a given origin
o (e.g., New York) to a given destination d (e.g., Boston). Suppose
that children who make this move at different ages have com-
parable other inputs, θi. Then one can infer the causal effect of
growing up in Boston relative to New York (μd −μo) by comparing
13. The model can be extended to allow the disruption cost to vary with the
neighborhood to which the child moves, or to allow the disruption cost to vary
with the age of the child at the time of the move. Neither of these extensions
would affect our estimates. The key requirement for our approach to identifying
{μc} is that the disruption costs do not vary in an age-dependent manner across
neighborhoods.
14. We do not estimate such models here primarily because of a lack of ade-
quate statistical power. As we will see, obtaining precise estimates of 6,000 treat-
ment effects (one per county, interacted with parent income) with our sample of ap-
proximately 3 million movers is itself challenging. Estimating higher-dimensional
models may be feasible as additional years of tax data become available in the
United States or using longer administrative panels in other countries.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 14 ---
1176
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
the outcomes of children who move at different ages; for instance,
if those who move at younger ages have better outcomes, we learn
that μd > μo.
Under the model in equation (1), we can combine information
from all such pairwise comparisons to estimate each place’s causal
effect using the following ﬁxed effects speciﬁcation:
(2)
yi = αod + ⃗ei ⃗·μ + ϵi,
where αod denotes an origin-by-destination ﬁxed effect and ⃗ei =
{eic} is a vector whose entries denote the number of years of expo-
sure that child i has to place c before age A. In a sample of children
who move exactly once before age A, eic is given by
eic =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
A−mi
if d(i) = c
mi
if o (i) = c
0
otherwise,
where mi denotes the age of the child at the time of the move.
Equation (2) is a reduced form of the model in equation (1) for
one-time movers, where αod = ¯θod −κ captures the sum of the dis-
ruption effect and the mean value of other inputs θi for children
who move from o to d, while ϵi = θi −¯θod captures idiosyncratic
variation in other inputs. By including origin-by-destination (αod)
ﬁxed effects in equation (2), we identify ⃗μ purely from variation
in the timing of moves, rather than comparing outcomes across
families that moved to or from different areas.15 The identiﬁca-
tion assumption required to obtain consistent estimates of ⃗μ when
estimating equation (2) using OLS is the following standard or-
thogonality condition.
ASSUMPTION 1. Conditional on αod, exposure time to each
place, ⃗ei, is orthogonal to other determinants of children’s
outcomes:
(3)
Cov(eic, ϵi) = 0 ∀c.
15. The ﬁxed effects ⃗μ are identiﬁed up to the normalization that the average
place effect is 0, E[μc] = 0, because the matrix E = {⃗ei}i does not have full rank.
Intuitively, using movers to identify place effects allows us to identify the effect of
each place relative to the national average.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 15 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1177
Assumption 1 requires that children with different exposure times
to a set of places do not systematically differ in other inputs,
ϵi = θi −¯θod, conditional on origin-by-destination ﬁxed effects.
This assumption is a stronger version of Assumption 1 in Chetty
and Hendren (2018a), which required that exposure to better
places—as measured by the outcomes of permanent residents—is
not correlated with ϵi on average. Assumption 1 extends that as-
sumption to require that the amount of exposure to every place
satisﬁes such an orthogonality condition. This stronger assump-
tion allows us to go beyond establishing that neighborhoods have
causal effects on average and characterize precisely which areas
produce the best outcomes. We provide evidence supporting As-
sumption 1 in Section IV.B after presenting our baseline results.
III.C. Empirical Implementation
In our empirical analysis, we generalize equation (2) to ac-
count for two features of the data that we omitted from the stylized
model in Section III.A for simplicity.
First, we allow for the possibility that places may have differ-
ent effects across parent income levels, as suggested by the maps
of permanent residents’ outcomes in Chetty and Hendren (2018a,
Figure II). To do so, we ﬁrst measure the percentile rank of the
parents of child i, p(i), based on their positions in the national
distribution of parental household income for child i’s birth co-
hort. Chetty et al. (2014) show that within each area, children’s
expected income ranks are well approximated by a linear func-
tion of their parents’ income rank p(i). We therefore generalize
equation (2) to allow place effects μc to vary linearly with parent
income rank, p(i). We denote the causal effect of place c at parent
rank p by
(4)
μpc = μ0
c + μ1
c p,
where μ0
c, the intercept, represents the causal effect of the place
for children in the lowest-income families and μ1
c, the slope, cap-
tures how the causal effect varies with parent rank. For symmetry,
we also allow the origin-by-destination ﬁxed effect αod in equation
(2) to vary linearly with parent rank p to capture potential het-
erogeneity in selection effects by parent income.
Second, because we measure children’s incomes at a ﬁxed
age, we measure their incomes in different calendar years. In
particular, incomes at age 26 are measured between 2006 and
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 16 ---
1178
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
2012 for children in our primary sample (the 1980–1986 birth
cohorts), a period with rapidly changing labor market conditions.
We account for these ﬂuctuations, allowing for differential shocks
across areas and income group, by including a control function
(5)
god(p, s) = ψ0
ods + ψ1
ods2 + ψ2
odsp + ψ3
ods2 p,
when estimating equation (2), where s denotes the child’s birth
cohort (or, equivalently, the year in which the child’s income is
measured). We show in Online Appendix A that alternative pa-
rameterizations of the g(p, s) control function yield very similar
results.
Incorporating these two extensions of equation (2), our base-
line estimating equation is
(6)
yi = αod + αP
odp + ⃗ei ⃗
·μp + god(pi, si) + εi,
where αod is an origin-by-destination ﬁxed effect, αP
odp is an origin-
by-destination ﬁxed effect interacted with parent rank, and ⃗μp =
{μpc} denotes the vector of causal place effects parameterized as
in equation (4).
1. Estimation: Hierarchical Structure. Our goal is to use
equation (6) to identify the causal effects of places at two geo-
graphic levels: CZs—aggregations of counties that represent local
labor markets—and counties. Directly estimating the 741 CZ-level
and 3,138 county-level ﬁxed effects along with the incidental pa-
rameters in equation (6) is not feasible because of computational
constraints. We therefore estimate ⃗μp using a hierarchical struc-
ture, separately estimating the causal effects of CZs and counties
within CZs.
We begin by estimating CZ effects using our sample of cross-
CZ movers. For computational tractability, we use a two-step esti-
mator, described in detail in Online Appendix A. In the ﬁrst step,
we estimate equation (6) separately for each origin-destination
(o, d) pair, which yields an estimate of the exposure effect for each
origin relative to each destination, μpod = μpd −μpo, for each level
of parental income, p.16 We then consider a ﬁxed parental income
level (e.g., p = 25) and regress the pairwise effects {μpod} on a
16. We restrict attention to the 11,216 o −d pairs that have at least 25
observations, which account for 75% of moves across CZs in our sample. We have
made the pairwise o −d estimates publicly available in Online Appendix Data
Table 5 to facilitate future research using alternative models of neighborhood
effects (e.g., models that permit heterogeneous match effects).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 17 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1179
design matrix that consists of positive and negative indicators for
each CZ to obtain an estimate of each CZ’s ﬁxed effect at percentile
p (see Online Appendix A for the speciﬁcation of this matrix). We
weight each observation by the precision of the pairwise estimate
in this regression. Finally, we normalize these estimates to have
a population-weighted mean of 0 across CZs (using populations
from the 2000 census), so that the ﬁxed effects can be interpreted
as the causal effect of the CZ relative to the average CZ in the
country. In our baseline speciﬁcations, we estimate the standard
errors of ˆμpc using bootstrap resampling of the microdata (see
Online Appendix B for details). For alternative speciﬁcations, we
report analytical standard errors obtained from the regression in
the second step of the estimation procedure, which are very simi-
lar to the bootstrapped estimates in the baseline case, to simplify
computation.
Identifying CZ effects using this two-step approach requires
that moves into and out of each CZ are balanced across counties.
Intuitively, if all movers into a CZ moved to one particular county,
one would effectively identify the sum of the CZ and that county’s
effect rather than the mean effect across all counties within the
CZ. In practice, moves are generally balanced relative to county
populations: the correlation between gross ﬂows into and out of
counties within each CZ and county populations recorded in the
2000 census is 0.90.
Having identiﬁed the CZ-level effects, we estimate county ef-
fects within each CZ purely from moves across counties within
CZs. Because there are only four counties on average within each
CZ, we can directly estimate equation (6) separately for each CZ
using movers across counties within that CZ.17 We normalize
these estimates to have a population-weighted mean of 0 across
counties within each CZ, so that the estimates can be interpreted
as the causal effect of each county relative to the CZ mean. We
obtain standard errors for these county-within-CZ ﬁxed effects
directly from the OLS regression in equation (6).
Finally, we construct county-level estimates by adding the
CZ-level ﬁxed effect estimate to the county-within-CZ ﬁxed effect
estimate. We use similar methods to estimate ﬁxed effects for
17. Because the counties in each CZ are all in the same labor market, we do not
permit the {ψ} coefﬁcients in the g(p, s) cohort control function to vary with origin
and destination when estimating the county-within-CZ models. This simpliﬁcation
reduces the number of parameters to be estimated signiﬁcantly without affecting
the results.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 18 ---
1180
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
subgroups (e.g., for boys versus girls) and other outcomes (e.g.,
rates of marriage).
IV. FIXED EFFECT ESTIMATES
This section presents ﬁxed effect estimates of CZ- and county-
level causal effects. We ﬁrst present baseline estimates using
equation (6) and then discuss how we evaluate the key identi-
ﬁcation assumption (Assumption 1) underlying our design.
IV.A. Baseline Estimates
As in our ﬁrst article, we measure children’s incomes based
on their percentile ranks in the income distribution. We deﬁne
child i’s percentile rank yi based on his or her position in the na-
tional distribution of incomes relative to all others in his or her
birth cohort. We focus on children growing up with parents at ei-
ther the 25th or 75th percentiles of the parent income distribution
(p = 25 or p = 75). Given the linearity of the relationship between
children’s expected ranks and parent ranks, these estimates cor-
respond to the mean rank outcomes of children in below-median
(p < 50) and above-median (p ⩾50) income families, and fully sum-
marize the conditional distribution of children’s outcomes given
parents’ incomes in each area.
We report place effects on both children’s own (individual)
incomes and their household incomes (including spousal income).
However, we focus primarily on the household income results be-
cause they provide a better measure of how areas affect children’s
economic opportunities, independent of variation in labor force
participation rates. Prior work on intergenerational mobility has
focused on the individual earnings of men as a way to sidestep the
challenges in measurement that arise from differences in female
labor force participation rates. In our data, we ﬁnd that men’s
individual income ranks at age 30 are very highly correlated with
both male and female household income ranks for permanent res-
idents across CZs (with population-weighted correlations above
0.9 for children with parents at p = 25), but are not highly corre-
lated with women’s individual earnings ranks (correlation = 0.41).
These correlations suggest that women’s household incomes pro-
vide a better representation of the earnings levels that would
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 19 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1181
prevail if labor force participation rates were held constant than
women’s individual incomes.18
Figure I, Panel A plots the CZ ﬁxed effect estimates on chil-
dren’s household incomes at age 26 given parents at p = 25, ˆμ25,c,
versus the outcomes of children of permanent residents in each
CZ, ¯y25,c. CZs with more than 2.5 million residents are labeled,
with the dashed vertical bars showing 95% conﬁdence intervals
for these estimates. We ﬁrst discuss the variation in the ﬁxed
effects plotted on the y-axis and then turn to the relationship
between this variation and the permanent residents’ outcomes
shown on the x-axis. As an example, we estimate that every year
of exposure to Los Angeles decreases the expected income rank of
a child growing up in a low-income family (p = 25) by 0.17 per-
centiles (std. err. = 0.04) relative to the average CZ in the United
States In contrast, every year of exposure to Cleveland, OH, in-
creases a child’s income rank by 0.12 percentiles (std. err. = 0.10)
relative to the average CZ.
To interpret the magnitude of these effects, it is helpful to
translate these percentile changes into dollar values.19 To do so,
we regress the mean income levels of children of permanent resi-
dents in each CZ, ¯y$
pc, on their mean income ranks, ¯ypc, separately
at each parent income percentile p, weighting by population. This
regression yields a coefﬁcient of $818 for p = 25, implying that a
18. One may be concerned that measuring household income at age 26, as we
do in our baseline analysis to maximize precision, could yield biased estimates
of areas’ impacts on individuals’ permanent household income because of differ-
ences in ages at ﬁrst marriage across areas. We approach this issue empirically by
evaluating what the best predictor of place effects on household income at age 32
is given information available by age 26. We regress permanent residents’ mean
household income ranks at age 32 given parents at p = 25 on three predictors:
permanent residents’ mean household income rank at age 26, mean individual
income rank at age 26, and college attendance rates from ages 18–23. All three
measures have predictive power, but the coefﬁcient on household rank is signif-
icantly larger than the other variables. Moreover, the predicted values from this
regression have a correlation of 0.97 with mean household income ranks at age 26
across CZs. Hence, mean household income ranks at age 26 provide an accurate
representation of place effects on household incomes at older ages.
19. A more direct method of estimating place effects on the level of income
(in dollars) would be to estimate ˆμpc using income levels instead of ranks as
the outcome. The estimates of σμpc obtained using income levels as the outcome
are highly correlated with our baseline estimates using ranks (Online Appendix
Table I, row 4), but have many more outliers because of outliers in income levels at
the individual level. This is why we use rank outcomes, which yield more precise
and stable results across speciﬁcations, for our primary analysis.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 20 ---
1182
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
FIGURE I
Causal Effect Estimates versus Permanent Residents’ Outcomes for Low-Income
Families
Panel A plots causal effects of childhood exposure to each CZ, estimated using
movers’ outcomes, versus permanent residents’ outcomes. The vertical axis shows
estimates of ˆμ25,c, the causal effect of an additional year of childhood exposure
to a CZ (relative to the average CZ) on the mean percentile rank at age 26 for
children in families at income percentile p = 25. The horizontal axis plots ¯y25,c,
the mean ranks of children of permanent residents (nonmovers) at p = 25. CZs
with populations above 2.5 million (based on the 2000 census) are labeled. Dashed
vertical bars show 95% conﬁdence intervals for ˆμ25,c. The solid line shows the
conditional expectation of ˆμ25,c given ¯ypc, estimated using an OLS regression
pooling all CZs and weighting by the precision of ˆμ25,c. Panel B replicates Panel
A at the county level. Counties within the New York and Newark CZs that have
populations above 500,000 are labeled. The sample in both ﬁgures consists of all
children in the 1980–1986 birth cohorts who are U.S. citizens; see Section II for
further details.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 21 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1183
1 percentile increase in income translates to an additional $818
at age 26 on average. The mean income of children with below-
median income parents is $26,091; therefore, a 1 percentile in-
crease corresponds to approximately a
818
26,091 = 3.14% increase in
income. The point estimates in Figure I, Panel A therefore imply
that one year of exposure to Cleveland instead of the average CZ
would raise a child’s income by 0.12 × 3.14% = 0.38%, whereas an
additional year of exposure to Los Angeles instead of the average
CZ would reduce a child’s income by 0.17 × 3.14% = 0.53%.
If we assume that these exposure effects are constant
throughout childhood in each area, these estimates would im-
ply that children who move to Cleveland at birth and stay there
for 20 years would earn 20 × 0.38% = 7.5% more than if they
had grown up in the average CZ. Conversely, spending 20 years
of childhood in Los Angeles instead of the average CZ would
reduce a child’s income by about 10.7% relative to the average
CZ.20
Figure I, Panel B presents analogous estimates for each
county in the US, highlighting estimates for counties in the New
York and Newark CZs that have populations above 500,000. For
example, ˆμ25,c = −0.23 percentiles (std. err. = 0.10) in the Bronx,
implying that growing up in the Bronx causes an income loss of
approximately 0.72% per year of childhood exposure relative to
the average county in the United States In contrast, ˆμ25,c = 0.25
percentiles (std. err. = 0.19) in Hudson County, NJ, equivalent to
an income gain of 0.79% per year of exposure.
The dispersion in the estimates on the y-axes on Figure I,
Panels A and B suggests that there may be substantial variation
in the causal effects of places μpc, although part of the observed
dispersion is driven simply by sampling error in our estimates ˆμpc.
We quantify the magnitude of the variation in μpc after accounting
for the variation in ˆμpc that is due to sampling error in Section V.
1. Comparison to Permanent Residents’ Outcomes. It is in-
structive to compare the ﬁxed effect estimates of μpc based
20. Chetty and Hendren (2018a, Figure IV) show that the effect of each ad-
ditional year of exposure to a better area is roughly constant over the range of
ages they are able to study (ages 9–23). To predict the causal impacts of growing
up in an area from birth, we must assume that the exposure effects ˆμ25,c remain
constant even prior to age nine, a strong assumption that remains to be tested in
future work. The estimates of the impact of growing up in a given area from birth
reported here should therefore be interpreted as approximate values.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 22 ---
1184
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
on movers to the outcomes of children of permanent residents
(nonmovers) in each area. Under the model in equation (1), per-
manent residents’ outcomes combine the causal effect of growing
up in a given area with selection effects reﬂecting differences in
family inputs across areas:
(7)
¯ypc = Aμpc + ¯θpc,
where Aμpc is the cumulative effect of childhood exposure to place
c and
¯θpc = E[θi|p(i) = p, c (i, t) = c ∀t]
is the average of the other inputs θi obtained by children of per-
manent residents in location c.21
Figure I shows that the causal effect estimates ˆμ25,c based on
the sample of movers are highly correlated with permanent resi-
dents’ outcomes ¯y25,c, consistent with the ﬁndings in Chetty and
Hendren (2018a). At the CZ level, regressing ˆμ25,c on ¯y25,c yields
a slope of γ25 = dE[μ25,c| ¯y25,c]
d¯y25,c
= 0.032 (std. err. 0.003), illustrated by
the best-ﬁt line in Figure I, Panel A. That is, a year of exposure
to a CZ where permanent residents’ outcomes are 1 percentile
higher increases a given child’s outcomes by 0.032 percentiles.22
We ﬁnd similar estimates at the county level and for children in
high-income families (p = 75) (Online Appendix Figure I).
Although ¯ypc is highly predictive of μpc on average, there
are many differences between the causal effect estimates and
21. If neighborhood effects vary across areas within CZs or counties, as is
likely to be the case, then differences in the geographical distribution of permanent
residents relative to movers within an area c would also be incorporated into the
selection term ¯θpc.
22. This estimate of γ 25 = 0.032 differs from the estimate of γ ≃0.04 reported
in our ﬁrst article because we impose less stringent population restrictions (re-
quiring populations above 25,000 instead of 250,000), do not impose restrictions
on the distance of moves, and focus on families at p = 25 rather than aggregating
across all percentiles. In addition, we estimated γ in our ﬁrst article by directly
projecting movers’ outcomes onto the outcomes of permanent residents. The ad-
vantage of that approach relative to the analysis in Figure I is that it directly
uses permanent residents’ outcomes as “goal posts” for movers’ expected outcomes
in each place. This allows us to implement placebo tests exploiting heterogeneity
across subgroups and increases statistical power, allowing us to estimate expo-
sure effects nonparametrically by age and to estimate speciﬁcations that control
for family ﬁxed effects or are identiﬁed from displacement shocks.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 23 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1185
permanent residents’ outcomes in certain cases. For example, chil-
dren of permanent residents in Cleveland have worse outcomes
than those in Los Angeles. The causal effect estimates based on
movers, however, imply that Cleveland produces better outcomes
for a given child than Los Angeles. We present a more system-
atic comparison between causal effects and permanent residents’
outcomes in Section VI.B.
2. Alternative Speciﬁcations. In Online Appendix A, we assess
the sensitivity of our estimates of ˆμ25,c to several alternative spec-
iﬁcations: (i) modeling heterogeneity in the impact of places across
parental income levels using a quadratic function of parental in-
come rank p instead of the linear speciﬁcation used in equation
(6); (ii) controlling for ﬂuctuations across cohorts using alterna-
tive parameterizations relative to the speciﬁcation in equation (5);
(iii) measuring children’s outcomes in levels instead of percentile
ranks; and (iv) using income measures that adjust for local costs of
living. All of these speciﬁcations yield ﬁxed effect estimates that
are very highly correlated with our baseline estimates (Online
Appendix Table I).
IV.B. Validation of Research Design
The ﬁxed effect estimates μpc obtained from equation (6) can
only be interpreted as causal effects of areas under the identiﬁ-
cation assumption in equation (3), which requires that children’s
exposure to each area eic is orthogonal to other inputs θi, condi-
tional on origin-by-destination ﬁxed effects and parental income
levels. In this section, we evaluate whether equation (3) holds us-
ing tests that build on the methods in Section V of Chetty and
Hendren (2018a). We brieﬂy summarize the results of these tests
here; see Online Appendix C for details.
We organize our evaluation of equation (3) by partitioning θi
into two components: a component ¯θi that reﬂects inputs that are
ﬁxed within families, such as parent genetics and education, and
a residual component ˜θi = θi −¯θi that may vary over time within
families, such as parents’ jobs.
1. Fixed Factors. Fixed factors ¯θi can create selection bias in
estimates of μpc if ¯θi is correlated with the age at which child
i moves to a given area c. In Chetty and Hendren (2018a), we
showed that children who move to areas with better permanent
resident outcomes ¯ypc at younger ages do not have signiﬁcantly
different levels of ¯θi using speciﬁcations with family ﬁxed effects.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 24 ---
1186
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Since ¯ypc is very highly correlated with the causal effects of place
μpc (Figure I), this ﬁnding implies that any selection biases in our
estimates ˆμpc must arise from heterogeneity in ¯θi that is unrelated
to a place’s causal effect μpc. Intuitively, the concern that remains
is that the deviations of ˆμpc from the permanent resident predic-
tions γp( ¯ypc −¯yp) in Figure I might reﬂect selection bias rather
than causal effects.
We test for such selection biases using two placebo tests. First,
we examine the incomes (at age 26) of children who are older than
23 when their parents move. These children provide a natural
placebo group because they are less likely to move with their par-
ents and because our ﬁrst article shows that neighborhoods no
longer have exposure effects after age 23. Second, we implement
a placebo test using teenage labor force participation (LFP) at age
16. Teenage LFP rates provide an informative pretreatment in-
dicator because they are positively correlated with differences in
children’s incomes in adulthood across CZs. Both of these placebo
estimates of place effects are uncorrelated with our baseline esti-
mates of μpc (Online Appendix Table I, rows 7–8), indicating that
families who move to a given area at different times do not differ
systematically in their children’s potential outcomes.
2. Time-Varying Factors. The second potential source of bias
in our estimates of μpc are time-varying factors ˜θi that are corre-
lated with families’ decisions to move, such as parents’ incomes.
In Chetty and Hendren (2018a), we showed that the changes in
children’s incomes when families move to areas with better per-
manent resident outcomes ¯ypc are not driven by time-varying con-
founds using a set of placebo tests exploiting heterogeneity across
subgroups. As above, this result implies that any remaining bias
must arise from time-varying factors that are uncorrelated with
places’ causal effects μpc.
To assess the potential bias from such factors, we control for
changes in parental income and marital status when estimating
equation (6). The estimates of ˆμ25,c obtained with these controls
are nearly identical to the baseline estimates, with correlations
above 0.97 (Online Appendix Figure II). Hence, any violation of
our key identiﬁcation assumption would have to arise from time-
varying unobservables that are uncorrelated with both permanent
residents’ outcomes ¯ypc (in the origin and destination) and with
changes in income and marital status. We believe such violations
of the identiﬁcation condition are unlikely to be prevalent and
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 25 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1187
therefore view our baseline ﬁxed effects { ˆμpc} as providing unbi-
ased estimates of place effects.
In the next four sections, we use the ﬁxed effect estimates
to (i) quantify the magnitude of place effects, (ii) construct mean-
squared-error-minimizing forecasts of the causal effect of growing
up in each county, (iii) characterize the properties of areas that
produce higher levels of upward mobility, and (iv) identify areas
that produce good outcomes with low housing costs. The ﬁxed ef-
fect estimates { ˆμpc} are provided in Online Appendix Data Tables
3 and 4, and hence all of the results that follow can be reproduced
using publicly available data.
V. MAGNITUDE OF PLACE EFFECTS
How much does the neighborhood in which a child grows up
inﬂuence his or her outcomes in adulthood? In this section, we
estimate the standard deviation of place effects (σμpc) by decom-
posing the variation in the ﬁxed effect estimates ˆμpc into the por-
tion due to signal (differences in latent causal effects) versus noise
(sampling error).
V.A. Methods
The raw standard deviation of place effect estimates σ ˆμpc over-
states the true (signal) standard deviation of place effects σμpc be-
cause part of the variation in the estimates ˆμpc is due to sampling
error. To estimate σμpc, we decompose the place effect estimates
ˆμpc into the (latent) place effect μpc and sampling error ηpc:
(8)
ˆμpc = μpc + ηpc,
where ηpc is orthogonal to μpc (E[ηpc|μpc] = 0). This decomposition
implies that we can estimate σ 2
μpc by subtracting the variance
induced by sampling error, σ 2
ηpc, from the variance in the observed
estimates, σ 2
ˆμpc:
(9)
ˆσ 2
μpc = σ 2
ˆμpc −σ 2
ηpc.
We estimate the noise variance σ 2
ηpc as the average squared stan-
dard error,
σ 2
ηpc = E
	
s2
pc

,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 26 ---
1188
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
where spc denotes the standard error of ˆμpc, estimated using the
methods discussed in Section III.C, and the expectation is taken
across areas. We compute the standard error of the signal stan-
dard deviation estimate ˆσμpc using an asymptotic approximation
described in Online Appendix D. We use precision weights

1
s2pc

when estimating all of these parameters to maximize efﬁciency.23
V.B. Results
Table II reports the standard deviation of the raw ﬁxed effects
σ ˆμpc, the noise component σηpc, and the latent causal effects σμpc. We
report estimates at the CZ level, county level, and across counties
within CZs for children whose parents are at p = 25 and p = 75. In
Panel A, we report estimates of the standard deviation of annual
exposure effects on children’s income ranks at age 26. Panel B
rescales these estimates to present other metrics for the size of
place effects.
1. Low-Income Families. We begin by discussing the magni-
tude of neighborhood effects for children who grow up in low-
income families (p = 25). At the CZ level, the (precision-weighted)
standard deviation of the raw ﬁxed effects at p = 25 is σ ˆμ25,c = 0.25,
as reported in the ﬁrst row in Table II. A large fraction of this
variation is due to noise: σηpc =

E

s2pc

= 0.21. Subtracting the
variance of the sampling error using equation (9) yields a signal
standard deviation across CZs of σμpc = 0.13. That is, living in a
one standard deviation better CZ based on children’s realized out-
comes increases a given low-income child’s expected rank by 0.13
per year of exposure.
Across counties at p = 25, we estimate σ ˆμ25,c = 0.43, ση25,c =
0.40, and σμpc = 0.17. The county-level estimates exhibit more
noise than the CZ-level estimates because sample sizes are
smaller at the county level. The standard deviation of causal ef-
fects across counties σμpc is larger than that across CZs, which
is expected because CZs are aggregations of counties. The esti-
mates imply that the standard deviation of counties’ causal effects
23. Precision weighting is efﬁcient if the signal variance σ 2
μpc is constant (ho-
moskedastic), but yields estimates that may vary with the sample in the presence
of heteroskedasticity. The estimates reported below are very similar if we instead
use population weights (which are sample-invariant), provided that we exclude
estimates of ˆμpc with exceptionally high standard errors (e.g., above the 99th
percentile of the distribution of spc).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 27 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1189
TABLE II
MAGNITUDES OF PLACE EFFECTS
Commuting zones
Counties
Counties within CZs
Below
Above
Below
Above
Below
Above
median
median
median
median
median
median
p = 25
p = 75
p = 25
p = 75
p = 25
p = 75
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Annual exposure effect estimates
Std. dev. of raw exposure effects
0.248
0.243
0.434
0.435
0.357
0.361
Std. dev. of noise component
0.210
0.218
0.402
0.407
0.343
0.344
Signal std. dev. of exposure effects
0.132
0.107
0.165
0.155
0.099
0.112
Standard error of signal std. dev.
0.010
0.013
0.014
0.016
0.008
0.008
Panel B: Signal std. dev. of causal effects from birth: 20 years of exposure
Percentile rank
2.65
2.14
3.31
3.09
1.98
2.23
Income in dollars
2,165
1,796
2,706
2,596
1,623
1,875
Percentage change in income
8.3
4.4
10.4
6.4
6.2
4.6
Panel C: Correlations with other outcomes
Signal correlation of causal effects and
0.799
0.909
0.698
0.492
0.577
0.044
permanent resident outcomes
Correlation between causal effects at
0.724
0.287
0.080
p = 25 and p = 75
Notes. This table quantiﬁes the magnitude of place effects on children’s household (i.e., family) incomes. The ﬁrst pair of columns reports estimates of the variation in place effects
across CZs, estimated using movers across CZs. The second pair reports estimates across counties, summing the ﬁxed effect estimates obtained from the county-within-CZ movers
sample and the CZ estimates; and the third pair reports the implied county-within-CZ estimates based on the difference between the estimates in the ﬁrst two pairs of columns.
In each case, we report estimates for families with below-median (p = 25) and above-median (p = 75) income. In Panel A, the ﬁrst row presents the raw standard deviation of the
ﬁxed effect estimates across areas, weighting by precision (
1
SE2 ), where SE is the estimated standard error of the ﬁxed effect. The second row presents the standard deviation of
the sampling noise component (again weighted by precision,
1
SE2 ). The third row presents the estimated signal standard deviation, computed as the square root of the difference
between the raw variance and the noise variance. The fourth row shows the standard error of the signal standard deviation estimate, computed using the asymptotic approximation
in Online Appendix B. Panel B quantiﬁes the size of the effects of growing up in a one standard deviation better area from birth (20 years of childhood exposure). The ﬁrst row
shows the impact on a child’s percentile rank, multiplying the signal standard deviation estimate in Panel A by 20. The next two rows rescale these percentile rank impacts into
dollar increases and percentage increases in children’s incomes using the methods described in Section V.B. In Panel C, the ﬁrst row reports the correlation between the causal effect
estimates and the permanent resident outcomes (weighted by the precision of the ﬁxed effect estimates), multiplied by the ratio of the raw standard deviation to the signal standard
deviation to adjust for noise. The second row presents the correlation between the 25th and 75th percentile ﬁxed effect estimates, weighting by the inverse of the sum of the variances
of these estimates. These estimates are constructed by splitting the sample at the median family income to obtain estimates of the p = 25 and p = 75 ﬁxed effects from independent
samples, adjusting for noise by rescaling the raw correlation using the ratio of the raw standard deviations to the signal standard deviations.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 28 ---
1190
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
within a given CZ is 0.10 on average, showing that there is nearly
as much variation in children’s outcomes across counties within
CZs as there is across CZs.
To interpret the magnitude of these standard deviations, in
Panel B, we rescale the annual exposure effects in three steps
analogous to those used in Section IV.A. First, we multiply the
annual exposure effect estimates by 20 to obtain a rough estimate
of the causal effect of growing up in a given area from birth.24
Second, we translate the percentile changes into dollar values by
multiplying the estimates by $818, given our estimate above that
each additional income rank translates to an additional $818 of
income at age 26 on average for children with parents at p = 25.
Third, we translate the estimates to percentage impacts on income
by dividing by the mean level of income at age 26 for children with
below-median income parents ($26,091).
Using this rescaling, our estimates imply that for a child with
parents at p = 25, growing up in a one standard deviation bet-
ter county from birth would increase his or her income at age
26 by 3.3 percentiles. This translates to an increase in income of
$2,700, which is a 10.4% increase in income (about 0.5% a year
of childhood exposure). For comparison, a one standard devia-
tion increase in parental income ranks is associated with an 7.1
percentile increase in children’s ranks at age 26 in our sample.
The causal effects of neighborhoods are thus nearly half as large
as the association between parent and child income. As another
benchmark, Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2014b) estimate that
being assigned to a one standard deviation better teacher (based
on the teacher’s test score value added) for a single school year
raises income by 1.3%. Hence, growing up in a one standard de-
viation better county is roughly equivalent to having eight con-
secutive years of a one standard deviation higher value-added
teacher. These comparisons show that neighborhood effects are
an important determinant of children’s outcomes, with an order
of magnitude comparable to other potential interventions, such as
changes in educational quality or family resources. However, like
these other factors, the area in which a child grows up explains
only a small portion of the total variance in children’s outcomes:
the standard deviation of county effects (3.3 percentiles) is only
24. As noted already, Chetty and Hendren (2018a) show that exposure effects
are approximately constant between ages 9 and 23, suggesting that the appropri-
ate scaling factor to estimate impacts from birth is between 14 and 23.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 29 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1191
11.4% of the unconditional standard deviation of children’s ranks
(which is 28.9 percentiles).25
The standard deviation of the causal effects of places μ25, c
is smaller than the standard deviation of permanent residents’
outcomes ¯ypc, implying that the variation in permanent residents’
outcomes across areas is partly due to selection. At the CZ level,
σ ¯y25,c = 3.3 percentiles, while the causal effect of growing up in a
one standard deviation better CZ from birth is 2.7 percentiles.
The corresponding values at the county level are 4.2 and 3.3 per-
centiles. The correlation between ¯y25,c and μ25, c is 0.80 across CZs
and 0.58 across counties within CZs.26 Hence, permanent resi-
dents’ outcomes are quite informative about places’ causal effects,
but there are signiﬁcant differences between μ25, c and ¯y25,c, es-
pecially at the county level. These results demonstrate that the
differences between ˆμ25,c and ¯y25,c in Figure I reﬂect not just sam-
pling error, but differences between places’ causal effects μ25, c and
permanent residents’ outcomes that are driven by selection.
2. High-Income Families. Neighborhoods have similar effects
in percentile rank and dollar terms for children of high-income
(p = 75) parents, but matter less in percentage terms because
children in high-income families have higher mean incomes. For
children with parents at the 75th percentile of the income dis-
tribution, the signal standard deviation of place effects at the
county level is 3.1 percentiles, which translates to a dollar change
of $2,600, or a 6.4% change in income. The place where a child
grows up may matter less for children with higher-income par-
ents because high-income families are able to insulate themselves
from local conditions more effectively (e.g., by switching to private
schools if public schools are weak).
25. In this sense, our estimates are consistent with the upper bound on neigh-
borhood effects constructed by Solon, Page, and Duncan (2000) based on the cor-
relation between neighbors’ outcomes within an area. Solon, Page, and Duncan
(2000, 390) estimate that a one standard deviation increase in neighborhood (de-
ﬁned as a PSID sampling cluster) quality is associated with at most a 0.32 standard
deviation increase in years of education. Our estimates imply that a one standard
deviation increase in county quality causes a
3.3
28.9 = 0.11 standard deviation in-
crease in children’s ranks.
26.
We
estimate
these
correlations
as
Corr(μ25,c, ¯y25,c) =
Corr( ˆμ25,c, ¯y25,c) SD( ˆμ25,c)
SD(μ25,c), where the ratio of standard deviations is obtained
from Table II and adjusts for the attenuation in Corr( ˆμ25,c, ¯y25,c) due to sampling
error in ˆμ25,c.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 30 ---
1192
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
For high-income families, the causal effects μ75, c are highly
correlated with permanent residents’ outcomes ¯y75,c across CZs
(correlation = 0.91). However, across counties within CZs, the
correlation between μ75, c and ¯y75,c falls to 0.04, suggesting that
the observational variation in children’s outcomes across areas
within a given CZ is driven primarily by sorting rather than causal
effects for afﬂuent families.
Are the places that generate good outcomes for the poor the
same as those that generate good outcomes for the rich? Across
CZs, the signal correlation between μ25, c and μ75, c is 0.72.27
Across counties within CZs, the correlation is 0.08. In short, there
is no evidence that places that generate better outcomes for the
poor generate worse outcomes for the rich; if anything, at broad
geographies, places that are better for the poor are better for the
rich, too.28
3. Heterogeneity by Gender. Estimating ﬁxed effects ˆμpc sepa-
rately for male and female children, we ﬁnd that the place where
a child grows up matters more for boys than girls, especially in
low-income families (Online Appendix Table II). Growing up in
a one standard deviation better county from birth in a family at
the 25th percentile increases boys’ household income ranks by
5.5 percentiles (16.4%), compared with 3.5 percentiles (11.4%) for
girls. The correlation between boys’ and girls’ place effects is 0.85
across counties, indicating that the places that are good for boys
are generally good for girls as well. However, the variance of out-
comes across areas is larger for boys, in particular because there
are some areas with very negative outcomes for boys in poor fam-
ilies. We discuss these differences by gender in further detail in
Section VI.
27. When computing these correlations, we estimate μ25, c using families with
below-median income (p < 50) and μ75, c using families with above-median in-
come (p > 50) to obtain estimates from independent samples that are not spu-
riously correlated due to sampling error. We compute the signal correlation as
ρ = Cov(μ25,c,μ75,c)
σμ25,c σμ75,c
= Cov( ˆμ25,c, ˆμ75,c)
σμ25,c σμ75,c
. We use precision weights (
1
s2μpc ) to estimate the
signal standard deviations σμpc and weight by the inverse of the sum of the stan-
dard errors squared,
1
s2μ25,c +s2μ75,c
when estimating Cov

ˆμ25,c, ˆμ75,c

.
28. This cross-sectional correlation does not imply that policies that improve
the outcomes of the poor will not affect the rich. Moreover, these correlations only
show that better outcomes for the poor in a given CZ or county c are not associated
with worse outcomes for the rich within the same CZ or county; they do not shed
light on potential spillover effects on the outcomes of the rich in other areas.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 31 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1193
VI. FORECASTS OF PLACE EFFECTS
Given that neighborhoods have substantial causal effects on
children’s outcomes, where should a family who wants to maxi-
mize their children’s incomes live? In this section, we address this
question by constructing forecasts of place effects that minimize
the MSE of the true impact of growing up in a given area relative
to the predicted impact.
VI.A. Methods
The ﬁxed effect estimates based on movers ˆμpc provide unbi-
ased but imprecise estimates of place effects, as illustrated by the
wide conﬁdence intervals for some of the estimates in Figure I.
To obtain more precise forecasts of places’ causal effects, we com-
bine ˆμpc with information on permanent residents’ outcomes ¯ypc.
Permanent residents’ outcomes are estimated with essentially no
sampling error, but are biased predictors of μpc because they com-
bine causal effects with sorting. By shrinking our estimates of ˆμpc
toward predictions based on ¯ypc, we substantially reduce predic-
tion errors, decreasing the estimator’s variance at the expense of
introducing some bias.29
Formally, we construct forecasts μ f
pc of each area’s true causal
effect μpc at a given level of parental income p that minimize the
mean squared prediction error 
c(μpc −μ f
pc)2.30 For simplicity,
we restrict attention to linear predictors:
(10)
μ f
pc = α + ρ1p(spc) ˆμpc + ρ2p(spc) ¯ypc,
allowing the coefﬁcients ρ1p(spc) and ρ2p(spc) to vary with the de-
gree of sampling error spc in ˆμpc.31
29. Including other predictors, such as racial demographics, poverty rates, or
other observable neighborhood characteristics, in addition to permanent residents’
outcomes yields very similar forecasts and does not reduce the MSE of the forecasts
appreciably (Online Appendix D and Online Appendix Figure III).
30. We use a quadratic loss function as an analytically tractable speciﬁcation
that penalizes large errors more heavily, based on the reasoning that large errors
in predicting place’s effects are likely to have much larger utility costs to families
seeking to move than small errors. The ﬁxed effect estimates reported in the online
data tables could be used to construct forecasts that achieve other objectives, such
as maximizing the likelihood of moving to a neighborhood with a high causal effect.
31. In general, the MSE-minimizing forecast μ f
pc would use the entire set of
ﬁxed effect estimates and their variance-covariance matrix

ˆμpc, spc

. Intuitively,
one would optimally incorporate information not only for place c but also other
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 32 ---
1194
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
We make two additional simplifying assumptions in con-
structing forecasts using equation (10). First, we assume that ¯ypc
is measured without error. Second, we model the true variance of
place effects as homoskedastic, that is, we assume Var(μpc) does
not vary with c. The ﬁrst assumption is purely an expositional
simpliﬁcation; incorporating sampling error in ¯ypc yields forecasts
that are correlated more than 0.99 with the baseline estimates.
The second assumption is more substantive. We have found that
permitting some forms of heteroskedasticity in μpc (e.g., by deciles
of population size or sampling variance, spc) does not affect our
estimates appreciably. Nevertheless, in future work, it would be
useful to study whether more ﬂexible models can yield further
reductions in prediction errors using the estimates of ˆμpc, spc, and
¯ypc that are publicly available in Online Appendix Data Tables 3
and 4.
1. Best Linear Predictors. For a given level of parental income
p, the MSE-minimizing coefﬁcients ρ1p(spc) and ρ2p(spc) in equa-
tion (10) are equivalent to those that would be obtained from a
(hypothetical) OLS regression of μpc on ˆμpc and ¯ypc, estimated
with one observation per area (c) using the subset of areas whose
ﬁxed effect estimates have standard errors of a given level spc.
We derive these coefﬁcients using a partial regression approach
in Online Appendix D. The resulting MSE-minimizing forecast is
given by
(11)
μ f
pc =
χ2
p
χ2p + s2pc
ˆμpc +
s2
pc
χ2p + s2pc
γp( ¯ypc −¯yp),
where ¯yp = E

¯ypc

is the mean of ¯ypc across areas, γp = Cov( ˆμpc, ¯ypc)
Var( ¯ypc)
is the coefﬁcient obtained from regressing
ˆμpc on ¯ypc, χ2
p =
Var

μpc −γp( ¯ypc −¯yp)

= σ 2
μpc(1 −ρ2
μpc, ¯ypc) is the residual variance
of place effects (across places c) after subtracting out the com-
ponent explained by ¯ypc, and s2
pc is the noise variance (squared
standard error) of ˆμpc.
Equation (11) shows that the best linear prediction of each
county’s causal effect is a weighted average of ˆμpc and γp( ¯ypc −¯yp),
places c′ whose effects may be correlated with the effect of place c to predict μpc.
We focus on the model in equation (10) here for simplicity, but note that more
general forecasting models could be estimated in future work using the ﬁxed effect
estimates reported in the online data tables.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 33 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1195
where the weights depend on the degree of signal (measured by
χ2
p) versus noise (measured by s2
pc) in the ﬁxed effect estimate. The
weight on ¯ypc falls as the variance in the latent causal effects that
cannot be captured by permanent residents’ outcomes (χ2
p) rises.32
We estimate χ2
p by subtracting the average sampling variance
across places (E

s2
pc

) from the variance of the residuals obtained
from regressing ˆμpc on ¯ypc:
(12)
χ2
p = Var

ˆμpc −γp( ¯ypc −¯yp)

−E
	
s2
pc

.
We estimate χ2
p, γ p, and ¯yp weighting by the precision of the ﬁxed
effect estimates

1
s2pc

to maximize efﬁciency.
2. Graphical Representation of Optimal Forecasts. Figure II
presents graphical intuition for the construction of these optimal
forecasts for a subset of the CZs shown in Figure I, Panel A. The
circles plot the point estimates of each CZ’s causal effect ˆμ25,c at
p = 25 versus the permanent residents’ mean ranks ¯y25,c. The pre-
dicted values from a regression of ˆμ25,c on ¯y25,c in the full sample
of all CZs, γ25( ¯y25,c −¯y25), are shown by the solid line. The optimal
forecasts (shown by the diamonds) are a weighted average of ˆμ25,c
and γ25( ¯y25,c −¯y25).
The dashed vertical lines on this ﬁgure show one standard er-
ror conﬁdence intervals (spc) for ˆμ25,c. In CZs where the standard
error spc is smaller, the optimal forecast is closer to the estimate
from movers ˆμ25,c than the permanent resident prediction. For
example, in Los Angeles, the optimal forecast μ f
25,c = −0.13 per-
centiles per year of exposure is obtained by placing 78% of the
weight on ˆμ25,c and 22% on γ25( ¯y25,c −¯y25). In smaller CZs, where
the ﬁxed effects estimates are less precise, the optimal forecast
puts more weight on the predicted outcome based on the perma-
nent residents. For example, in Providence, RI, the optimal fore-
cast puts 70% of the weight on the permanent resident prediction.
3. Magnitude of Prediction Errors. The optimal forecasts differ
from the true causal effect because of sampling error in ˆμpc and
bias in permanent resident predictions, γp( ¯ypc −¯yp). The MSE of
the prediction in equation (11) for place c with standard error spc
32. For CZs with populations below 25,000 and counties with populations
below 10,000 in the 2000 census, we do not have an estimate of the causal effect
ˆμpc given our sample restrictions. In these areas, we deﬁne the optimal forecast
as γp( ¯ypc −¯yp), the forecast based purely on permanent residents’ outcomes.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 34 ---
1196
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
FIGURE II
Construction of Mean-Squared-Error-Minimizing Forecasts
This ﬁgure illustrates the construction of the MSE-minimizing forecasts of
causal effects, μ f
pc, for a selected set of CZs. The forecasts shown are for chil-
dren with parents at income percentile p = 25. The circles plot the raw ﬁxed effect
estimates ˆμ25,c (per year of childhood exposure) versus the mean ranks of children
of permanent residents, as in Figure I, Panel A. The dashed vertical lines around
these points represent ±1 standard error of ˆμ25,c. The solid regression line shows
E

μpc| ¯ypc

, the predicted causal effect of each CZ given the outcomes of its per-
manent residents, which is estimated from a population-weighted OLS regression
of ˆμ25,c on ¯ypc using data for all CZs. The diamonds show the MSE-minimizing
forecast, which is a weighted average of ˆμ25,c (the circle) and E

μpc| ¯ypc

(the pre-
diction from the regression line), with greater weight placed on ˆμ25,c when the
standard error of ˆμ25,c is smaller.
is
e2
pc = E[μpc −μ f
pc]2 =
1
1
χ2p +
1
s2pc
.
If either the sampling error or sorting bias goes to 0, the root
mean squared error (RMSE) epc converges to 0 because the optimal
forecast puts weight purely on the measure that provides the most
accurate prediction. At the other extreme, if the sampling error
spc gets very large, epc is bounded above by χp, the error in the
permanent resident prediction. As a result, one obtains forecasts
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 35 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1197
that have much lower RMSE than forecasts based purely on ˆμpc
(which would have RMSE = spc) especially in smaller CZs.33
In addition to having much lower MSE than the raw ﬁxed
effects ˆμpc, an attractive feature of μ f
pc is that it is forecast un-
biased: moving a child to a county with a one percentile higher
forecasted effect increases that child’s income in adulthood by one
percentile on average. In this sense, the forecasts μ f
pc provide un-
biased predictions of the expected impacts of moving to a different
area on children’s outcomes.
VI.B. Forecasts for Commuting Zones
Figure III presents maps of the forecasted place effects μ f
pc
across CZs for children in below-median (p = 25) and above-
median (p = 75) income families, with lighter colors (color version
online) depicting areas that produce better outcomes.34 Table III
lists the forecasts for the 50 most highly populated CZs (which
accounted for 55.5% of the U.S. population in 2000), sorted in de-
scending order based on μ f
25,c, the forecasted effect for low-income
families.
1. Estimates for Low-Income Families. Among the 50 largest
CZs, Salt Lake City, UT, has the most positive forecasted causal
effect for children in below-median income families. We predict
that every additional year spent growing up in Salt Lake City
will increase a child’s income by 0.17 percentiles (RMSE = 0.07)
relative to an average CZ. Rescaling the estimates as described in
Section V.B into dollar impacts, this estimate implies that growing
up in Salt Lake City from birth (assuming 20 years of exposure)
would increase children’s incomes at age 26 by 10.4% relative to
growing up in the average CZ. Conversely, at the bottom of the
list, every additional year spent growing up in New Orleans is
predicted to reduce a child’s income by 0.21 percentiles (RMSE =
0.07) relative to an average CZ. This estimate implies that growing
33. From a Bayesian perspective, under the simplifying assumption that the
ˆμpc estimates are drawn independently across places, μ f
pc= E

μpc| ˆμpc, ¯ypc, spc

is
the posterior expectation of each place’s causal effect given a normal prior and
likelihood function. The standard deviation of the posterior distribution is epc and
the true parameter μpc lies within the credible interval μ f
pc ± 1.96epc with 95%
probability.
34. The maps are colored by grouping CZs into (unweighted) deciles. The
deciles are not symmetric around zero because μ f
pc is normalized to have a
population-weighted mean of zero and population density is negatively correlated
with μ f
pc.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 36 ---
1198
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
FIGURE III
Forecasts of Causal Effects on Children’s Income by Commuting Zone
These maps show MSE-minimizing forecasts of each commuting zone’s causal
effect, μ f
pc, on children’s household income at age 26. Panel A shows estimates for
children in below-median income families (p = 25), and Panel B shows estimates for
children in above-median income families (p = 75). These forecasts are constructed
using the methodology described in the notes to Figure II. Estimates are scaled to
show the percentage change in income from growing up from birth (i.e., 20 years
of childhood exposure) in a given CZ relative to the (population-weighted) average
CZ in the country. CZs are grouped into (unweighted) deciles based on their causal
effects, with lighter colors depicting areas with more positive causal effects. For
example, growing up in CZs in the highest decile raises children’s incomes at p = 25
by more than 23.8% relative to the average CZ, whereas growing up in the CZs in
the lowest decile reduces their incomes by 9.4% relative to the average CZ. CZs
with fewer than 250 permanent residents, for which we do not report permanent
resident outcomes and therefore do not have forecasts of causal effects, are shaded
with the striped pattern.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 37 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1199
TABLE III
MSE-MINIMIZING FORECASTS OF CAUSAL EFFECTS FOR 50 LARGEST COMMUTING
ZONES
Rank
Commuting
State
Below-median income
Above-median income
(p = 25) zone
parents (p = 25)
parents (p = 75)
Impact
% Impact
Impact
% Impact
on rank
from birth
on rank
from birth
Forecast RMSE Forecast Perm. Forecast RMSE Forecast Perm.
res.
res.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
1
Salt Lake City
UT
0.17
0.07
10.4
13.2
0.11
0.04
4.4
4.8
2
Seattle
WA
0.14
0.06
8.8
4.3
−0.01
0.04
−0.4
−1.2
3
Washington DC DC
0.10
0.05
6.6
1.4
0.06
0.03
2.5
0.2
4
Minneapolis
MN
0.10
0.07
6.4
6.0
0.08
0.04
3.2
3.2
5
Fort Worth
TX
0.06
0.06
3.6
0.8
0.05
0.04
2.0
1.5
6
San Diego
CA
0.06
0.05
3.5
3.7
−0.13
0.04
−5.4
−5.1
7
Boston
MA
0.06
0.06
3.5
4.3
0.03
0.04
1.4
1.3
8
Manchester
NH
0.05
0.07
3.2
5.9
0.02
0.04
1.0
1.0
9
San Jose
CA
0.05
0.06
3.0
4.8
−0.12
0.04
−4.9
−5.1
10
Las Vegas
NV
0.04
0.06
2.7
−0.1
−0.08
0.04
−3.2
−2.7
11
Denver
CO
0.04
0.07
2.6
2.6
−0.06
0.04
−2.5
−1.4
12
Portland
OR
0.04
0.07
2.4
0.7
−0.09
0.04
−3.8
−4.6
13
San Francisco
CA
0.03
0.06
1.8
2.3
−0.12
0.04
−4.9
−5.0
14
Pittsburgh
PA
0.01
0.06
0.8
3.0
0.10
0.04
4.3
4.0
15
Newark
NJ
0.01
0.05
0.7
1.1
0.06
0.03
2.4
1.5
16
Providence
RI
0.01
0.07
0.4
2.0
0.02
0.04
0.9
1.4
17
Sacramento
CA
0.01
0.06
0.4
1.3
−0.14
0.04
−5.9
−4.7
18
Phoenix
AZ
0.00
0.05
0.2
0.6
−0.02
0.04
−0.7
−1.7
19
Buffalo
NY
0.00
0.07
−0.2
−2.5
0.01
0.04
0.4
−0.2
20
Kansas City
MO
−0.01
0.07
−0.4
−2.3
0.02
0.04
0.8
1.1
21
Houston
TX
−0.03
0.05
−1.6
−0.3
0.01
0.04
0.3
−0.3
22
Miami
FL
−0.03
0.04
−1.6
−2.3
−0.20
0.04
−8.3
−7.8
23
Philadelphia
PA
−0.03
0.06
−1.8
−4.7
0.00
0.04
0.2
0.9
24
Grand Rapids
MI
−0.03
0.07
−2.0
−3.0
0.07
0.04
2.7
2.2
25
Dallas
TX
−0.04
0.06
−2.4
−3.1
−0.01
0.04
−0.4
−0.8
26
Cleveland
OH
−0.04
0.06
−2.7
−9.2
−0.03
0.04
−1.0
−1.7
27
Bridgeport
CT
−0.05
0.06
−2.9
0.7
0.03
0.04
1.2
1.5
28
Jacksonville
FL
−0.05
0.06
−3.0
−7.3
−0.07
0.04
−2.9
−2.7
29
Milwaukee
WI
−0.05
0.07
−3.0
−5.4
0.04
0.04
1.8
2.1
30
Dayton
OH
−0.06
0.07
−3.9
−6.4
0.02
0.04
0.6
0.4
31
Cincinnati
OH
−0.08
0.07
−5.2
−7.4
0.06
0.04
2.6
1.3
32
Columbus
OH
−0.09
0.07
−5.4
−7.1
0.01
0.04
0.3
−1.1
33
Nashville
TN
−0.09
0.07
−5.5
−6.4
−0.03
0.04
−1.1
−1.8
34
St. Louis
MO
−0.09
0.07
−5.6
−7.3
0.03
0.04
1.2
0.7
35
Austin
TX
−0.10
0.07
−6.1
−4.0
−0.10
0.04
−4.1
−3.4
36
Baltimore
MD
−0.10
0.07
−6.4
−7.5
0.07
0.04
2.8
2.1
37
San Antonio
TX
−0.11
0.06
−6.9
−3.5
−0.08
0.04
−3.2
−3.3
38
Tampa
FL
−0.11
0.05
−7.1
−4.5
−0.13
0.04
−5.3
−4.2
39
New York
NY
−0.12
0.04
−7.3
−0.9
−0.03
0.04
−1.3
−1.1
40
Indianapolis
IN
−0.12
0.07
−7.4
−8.5
−0.02
0.04
−0.8
0.1
41
Atlanta
GA
−0.12
0.04
−7.8
−12.5
−0.09
0.04
−3.9
−7.4
42
Los Angeles
CA
−0.13
0.04
−8.1
0.8
−0.23
0.03
−9.3
−7.4
43
Detroit
MI
−0.14
0.05
−8.5
−11.8
−0.13
0.04
−5.2
−6.7
44
Orlando
FL
−0.14
0.05
−8.5
−4.6
−0.14
0.04
−5.7
−3.9
45
Chicago
IL
−0.15
0.05
−9.7
−6.9
−0.03
0.03
−1.4
−1.3
46
Fresno
CA
−0.16
0.06
−10.3
−1.8
−0.12
0.04
−5.0
−4.3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 38 ---
1200
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE III
CONTINUED
Rank
Commuting
State
Below-median income
Above-median income
(p = 25) zone
parents (p = 25)
parents (p = 75)
Impact
% Impact
Impact
% Impact
on rank
from birth
on rank
from birth
Forecast RMSE Forecast Perm. Forecast RMSE Forecast Perm.
res.
res.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
47
Port St. Lucie FL
−0.17
0.06
−10.9
−5.8
−0.20
0.04
−8.2
−6.2
48
Raleigh
NC
−0.19
0.06
−12.2
−9.6
−0.11
0.04
−4.7
−3.3
49
Charlotte
NC
−0.20
0.06
−12.8
−11.0
−0.08
0.04
−3.5
−2.2
50
New Orleans
LA
−0.21
0.06
−13.4
−7.8
−0.06
0.04
−2.5
−2.6
Notes. This table presents MSE-minimizing forecasts of causal effects on children’s incomes in adulthood
for the 50 most populous CZs. Columns (1)–(4) present estimates for children growing up in below-median
income (p = 25) families. Column (1) reports estimates of the causal impact of spending an additional year of
childhood in a given CZ relative to the (population-weighted) average CZ in the country on a child’s household
income rank at age 26. Column (2) reports the root mean squared error of this forecast. Column (3) rescales the
estimates in column (1) to show the percentage change in income from growing up from birth (i.e., 20 years of
childhood exposure) in a given CZ. Column (4) reports the same statistic, but for a forecast that is constructed
solely based on the outcomes of permanent residents, excluding the data on movers. Columns (5)–(8) report
the analogous statistics for above-median income (p = 75) families. The table is sorted based on CZs’ causal
impacts at p = 25.
up in New Orleans from birth would reduce a child’s income by
13.4% relative to the average CZ and 23.8% relative to Salt Lake
City.
Figure III shows that many of the places that produce the
highest incomes at p = 25 are in the rural Midwest, which gen-
erate income gains (from birth) exceeding 23.8% relative to the
average area. Certain parts of the Northeast and West Coast also
generate very good outcomes, with gains above 10.6%. The South-
east produces some of the worst outcomes for children in low-
income families, with income losses exceeding 9.4% relative to the
average place. Parts of the industrial Midwest and other areas
such as the large Native American reservations in South Dakota
and Arizona generate very negative outcomes as well.
2. Causal Effects versus Permanent Residents’ Outcomes.
The geographical patterns of forecasted causal effects μ f
25,c in
Figure III are broadly similar to the geographical patterns of per-
manent residents’ outcomes ¯y25,c in observational data (Chetty
and Hendren 2018a, Figure II), but there are several notable dif-
ferences. For instance, Los Angeles is above the national average
in terms of its permanent residents’ outcomes ¯y25,c, but it is among
the worst cities in terms of its causal effect on low-income children
μ f
25,c (Table III).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 39 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1201
To quantify these differences more systematically, in the
fourth column of Table III we show the forecast γ25( ¯y25,c −¯y25)
that one would obtain if one were to use data only on perma-
nent residents (rescaled into percentage impacts). In Los Angeles,
μ f
25,c = −8.1, whereas the prediction based on permanent resi-
dents is +0.8%. Similarly, in New York, the causal impact is much
more negative than one would predict based on permanent resi-
dents’ outcomes. In Washington, DC, the pattern is reversed: per-
manent residents’ outcomes are close to the national mean, but
the forecasted causal effect is +6.6%, among the highest for large
CZs. These differences between the causal forecasts μ f
pc and the
permanent residents’ outcomes ¯ypc can be interpreted as selection
effects among permanent residents under our modeling assump-
tions, as shown in equation (7). We present a comprehensive anal-
ysis of the factors that drive the differences between μ f
pc and ¯ypc
in Section VII.
Overall, the (population-weighted) correlation between μ f
25,c
and ¯y25,c is 0.69 among the 50 largest CZs shown in Table III
and 0.89 across all CZs. The correlation between μ f
25,c and ¯y25,c
is higher in smaller CZs because the MSE-minimizing forecast in
equation (11) puts more weight on ¯y25,c when the causal effect is
estimated with less precision. In short, Table III shows that the
permanent residents’ outcomes used in our ﬁrst article provide
a very good starting point to predict places’ causal effects, but
combining that data with information on movers’ outcomes as
we do here yields much better predictions, especially in highly
populated areas.
3. Estimates for High-Income Families. The right half of Ta-
ble III and lower panel of Figure III show forecasts of place effects
for children in above-median income (p = 75) families, μ f
75,c. As
discussed in Section V, the variation in causal effects as a percent-
age of income is much smaller for families at p = 75 than p = 25.
The predicted impact of moving from the worst CZ (Los Angeles)
to the best CZ (Salt Lake City) is 13.7% for children in above-
median income families, roughly half the corresponding range for
children in below-median income families.
The geographical variation in causal effects at p = 75 is
weakly positively correlated with the variation at p = 25. Rural
areas produce better outcomes at p = 75, particularly in the Mid-
west. The Southeast tends to produce worse outcomes, although
parts of the South, such as Louisiana and Arkansas, generate con-
siderably better outcomes for the rich than for the poor, thereby
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 40 ---
1202
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
amplifying inequality across generations. Perhaps most strikingly,
much of the West Coast and parts of the Northeast have the low-
est values of μ f
75,c. This result turns out to be driven by measuring
children’s incomes at the household rather than individual level,
as we discuss next.
4. Individual Income and Marriage Rates. In our base-
line analysis, we measure children’s outcomes at the house-
hold level, summing the incomes of spouses for married couples
and using own income for single individuals. Online Appendix
Figure IV and Appendix Tables III– IV replicate Figure III and
Tables III– IV, measuring children’s income at the individual level
instead. The geographical patterns are broadly similar, with a
(population-weighted) correlation between the household-income
and individual-income estimates of 0.75 at p = 25 and 0.59 at
p = 75. However, in certain areas—most notably in coastal Cali-
fornia and the Northeast at p = 75—the patterns differ sharply.
These areas generate relatively high levels of individual income
even though they have among the lowest levels of household in-
come. For example, growing up in the San Francisco CZ from birth
in a p = 75 family is predicted to increase individual income at age
26 by 0.7% but reduce household income by 4.9% relative to the
average CZ. Conversely, Salt Lake City has much more positive
impacts on household income than individual income.
Places’ causal effects on individual and household income
differ largely because they have different causal effects on chil-
dren’s rates of marriage. As shown in Chetty and Hendren (2018a,
Figure VIIIb), places have linear childhood exposure effects on
rates of marriage as well. We can therefore forecast each area’s
causal effect on marriage rates using the same approach as above,
deﬁning the outcome as an indicator for being married at age 26
instead of a child’s income rank at age 26. The estimates are pre-
sented in Online Appendix Tables V and VI. Growing up in Salt
Lake City from birth increases a given child’s probability of being
married by 10.8 percentage points at p = 25 and 15.8 percentage
points at p = 75; the corresponding forecasts in San Francisco are
−2.3 percentage points and −8.0 percentage points. More gener-
ally, the areas that produce the highest rates of marriage tend to
produce higher levels of household income than individual income.
VI.C. Forecasts for Counties
Table IV presents forecasts of causal effects (on household
income) for the 100 most populous counties, focusing on those in
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 41 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1203
TABLE IV
MSE-MINIMIZING FORECASTS OF CAUSAL EFFECTS FOR 100 LARGEST COUNTIES (TOP
AND BOTTOM 25)
Rank
County
State
Below-median income
Above-median income
(p = 25)
parents (p = 25)
parents (p = 75)
Impact
% Impact
Impact
% Impact
on rank
from birth
on rank
from birth
Forecast RMSE Forecast Perm. Forecast RMSE Forecast Perm.
res.
res.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Panel A: Top 25 large counties
1
Dupage
IL
0.26
0.09
16.0
10.6
0.08
0.08
3.1
1.8
2
Fairfax
VA
0.24
0.10
15.0
13.6
0.26
0.10
11.0
2.5
3
Snohomish
WA
0.22
0.10
14.0
6.6
0.06
0.09
2.4
0.3
4
Bergen
NJ
0.22
0.10
13.8
11.5
0.15
0.10
6.3
2.4
5
Bucks
PA
0.20
0.10
12.4
8.1
−0.02
0.10
−0.9
2.1
6
Norfolk
MA
0.18
0.10
11.5
11.8
0.15
0.10
6.2
2.0
7
Montgomery
PA
0.16
0.10
9.7
7.3
0.07
0.09
3.0
1.8
8
Montgomery
MD
0.15
0.10
9.5
7.8
0.00
0.10
0.1
0.0
9
King
WA
0.15
0.08
9.3
3.2
0.08
0.08
3.2
−1.3
10
Middlesex
NJ
0.15
0.10
9.1
7.0
0.01
0.10
0.5
2.0
11
Contra Costa
CA
0.14
0.09
8.8
2.1
−0.07
0.09
−2.9
−2.7
12
Middlesex
MA
0.12
0.09
7.7
8.5
0.01
0.09
0.5
1.0
13
Macomb
MI
0.11
0.09
7.0
−1.0
0.03
0.09
1.1
−1.8
14
Salt Lake
UT
0.10
0.10
6.2
9.7
0.02
0.09
0.7
2.1
15
Ventura
CA
0.10
0.10
6.2
5.0
−0.05
0.09
−2.3
−3.1
16
San Mateo
CA
0.08
0.10
5.3
6.2
−0.04
0.10
−1.5
−1.7
17
Worcester
MA
0.08
0.11
4.7
2.6
0.13
0.11
5.4
1.6
18
Monmouth
NJ
0.07
0.10
4.7
2.4
0.07
0.10
3.0
1.0
19
Honolulu
HI
0.07
0.10
4.6
2.1
−0.13
0.11
−5.4
−3.8
20
Hudson
NJ
0.07
0.10
4.2
−0.4
0.16
0.11
6.7
−0.1
21
Kern
CA
0.06
0.09
3.9
5.1
−0.06
0.11
−2.5
−0.1
22
Clark
NV
0.06
0.07
3.7
−0.7
−0.05
0.09
−1.9
−2.2
23
San Diego
CA
0.06
0.06
3.7
2.6
−0.14
0.06
−5.6
−3.4
24
Providence
RI
0.05
0.10
3.0
−0.4
−0.04
0.11
−1.8
0.5
25
San Francisco
CA
0.05
0.10
2.8
4.4
−0.18
0.10
−7.6
−4.9
Panel B: Bottom 25 large counties
75
Jefferson
KY
−0.14
0.10
−8.6
−11.4
0.02
0.11
0.9
−2.4
76
Franklin
OH
−0.14
0.09
−8.6
−11.4
0.11
0.10
4.7
−2.4
77
San Bernardino CA
−0.14
0.06
−8.8
0.2
−0.25
0.07
−10.1
−3.3
78
Davidson
TN
−0.14
0.10
−8.9
−13.9
−0.04
0.11
−1.5
−4.5
79
Pima
AZ
−0.14
0.08
−8.9
−4.7
−0.14
0.10
−5.7
−4.2
80
Montgomery
OH
−0.14
0.10
−8.9
−11.7
−0.02
0.12
−0.6
−1.9
81
Travis
TX
−0.15
0.09
−9.2
−7.8
−0.16
0.09
−6.6
−4.4
82
Essex
NJ
−0.15
0.10
−9.2
−8.4
0.07
0.10
3.0
−2.1
83
Bexar
TX
−0.15
0.09
−9.6
−4.8
−0.09
0.12
−3.8
−3.6
84
Milwaukee
WI
−0.16
0.10
−9.9
−12.0
−0.03
0.10
−1.1
−1.7
85
Riverside
CA
−0.16
0.07
−10.1
1.2
−0.25
0.08
−10.3
−3.4
86
Los Angeles
CA
−0.16
0.05
−10.3
−0.5
−0.25
0.05
−10.5
−6.0
87
Wake
NC
−0.17
0.10
−10.7
−6.7
−0.09
0.10
−3.9
−2.1
88
New York
NY
−0.17
0.08
−10.8
−5.3
−0.27
0.10
−11.4
−6.9
89
Fulton
GA
−0.17
0.08
−10.9
−15.8
0.02
0.08
1.0
−7.4
90
Bronx
NY
−0.17
0.08
−10.9
−7.2
−0.20
0.11
−8.3
−6.1
91
Wayne
MI
−0.18
0.08
−11.4
−14.3
−0.07
0.08
−3.0
−5.6
92
Orange
FL
−0.19
0.08
−12.1
−6.1
−0.09
0.09
−3.8
−3.6
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 42 ---
1204
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE IV
CONTINUED
Rank
County
State
Below-median income
Above-median income
(p = 25)
parents (p = 25)
parents (p = 75)
Impact
% Impact
Impact
% Impact
on rank
from birth
on rank
from birth
Forecast RMSE Forecast Perm. Forecast RMSE Forecast Perm.
res.
res.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
93
Cook
IL
−0.20
0.06
−12.8
−9.7
−0.03
0.05
−1.2
−2.6
94
Palm Beach
FL
−0.21
0.08
−13.0
−5.6
−0.31
0.10
−13.0
−4.6
95
Marion
IN
−0.21
0.10
−13.1
−13.3
−0.10
0.09
−4.2
−2.8
96
Shelby
TN
−0.21
0.09
−13.1
−16.8
0.03
0.10
1.2
−4.9
97
Fresno
CA
−0.22
0.09
−13.5
−3.7
−0.05
0.11
−2.1
−3.5
98
Hillsborough
FL
−0.22
0.09
−13.8
−4.3
−0.19
0.10
−7.9
−2.4
99
Baltimore City MD
−0.22
0.09
−14.0
−15.5
−0.02
0.10
−0.7
−6.4
100
Mecklenburg
NC
−0.23
0.10
−14.5
−13.4
−0.09
0.10
−3.7
−3.8
Notes. This table presents MSE-minimizing forecasts of counties’ causal effects on children’s incomes in
adulthood. The table reports estimates for counties that are in the top or bottom 25 among the 100 most
populous counties based on their impacts on below-median income families (p = 25). Columns (1)–(4) present
estimates for children growing up in below-median income (p = 25) families. Column (1) reports estimates of
the causal impact of spending an additional year of childhood in a given county relative to the (population-
weighted) average county in the country on a child’s household income rank at age 26. Column (2) reports the
root mean squared error of this forecast. Column (3) rescales the estimates in column (1) to show the percentage
change in income from growing up from birth (i.e., 20 years of childhood exposure) in a given county. Column
(4) reports the same statistic, but for a forecast that is constructed solely based on the outcomes of permanent
residents, excluding the data on movers. Columns (5)–(8) report the analogous statistics for above-median
income (p = 75) families. The table is sorted based on counties’ causal impacts at p = 25.
the top and bottom 25 based on μ f
25,c. Analogous estimates for all
counties in the United States are available in Online Appendix
Data Table 2.35
1. Estimates for Low-Income Families. DuPage County (the
western suburbs of Chicago) produces the best outcomes for chil-
dren from below-median income families among the 100 largest
counties. Growing up from birth in DuPage County would in-
crease a child’s income by 16.0% relative to the average county.
The counties that produce the best outcomes are dispersed across
the country: they include Fairfax County in Virginia, Snohomish
County in Washington, and Bergen County in New Jersey. At the
bottom of the list, Mecklenburg County (the city of Charlotte in
35. We construct these forecasts by applying equation (11) directly to the
county ﬁxed effect estimates ˆμpc, deﬁned as the sum of the CZ and county-within-
CZ ﬁxed effect estimates as discussed in Section III.C. An alternative approach
which permits different shrinkage factors at the county-within-CZ and CZ levels
is to forecast the effect of each county relative to the average county within each
CZ and then add these county-within-CZ forecasts to the CZ-level forecasts. In
practice, these two methods deliver very similar results.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 43 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1205
FIGURE IV
Forecasts of Causal Effects by County in the New York and Boston Areas
These maps show MSE-minimizing forecasts of each county’s causal effect, μ f
pc,
on children’s household income at age 26 for counties in the New York and Boston
combined statistical areas. Panels A and B show estimates for children in below-
median income families (p = 25), and Panels C and D show estimates for children
in above-median income families (p = 75). These county-level forecasts are con-
structed using an approach analogous to that described in the notes to Figure II.
Estimates are scaled to show the percentage change in income from growing up
from birth (i.e., 20 years of childhood exposure) in a given county relative to the
(population-weighted) average county in the country. Counties are grouped into
deciles at the national level based on their causal effects, with lighter colors de-
picting areas with more positive causal effects.
North Carolina) generates the most negative outcomes, reduc-
ing children’s incomes by 14.5%. Baltimore City in Maryland,
Hillsborough County in Florida, and Fresno County in Califor-
nia also produce large income losses for children in low-income
families.
Counties’ causal effects vary substantially even within metro
areas. Figure IV illustrates this variation by mapping μ f
25,c for
counties in the New York City and Boston combined statistical
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 44 ---
1206
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
areas (CSAs). The estimates imply that growing up in a low-
income family in Manhattan from birth reduces children’s incomes
by 10.8% relative to the mean, whereas growing up across the
Hudson river in Hudson County, NJ, increases children’s incomes
by 4.2% relative to the mean. Hence, moving from Manhattan to
Hudson County at birth would increase children’s incomes by
15.0%. Likewise, moving at birth from the city of Boston (Suf-
folk County) across the Charles River to Middlesex County would
increase children’s incomes by 13.8%. These maps illustrate a
pattern observed in many cities, which is that city centers tend to
produce worse outcomes, particularly for children in low-income
families, than do suburbs.
One of the most striking examples of local area variation is the
difference between DuPage County, the best county in the United
States, and Cook County (the city of Chicago), which is the eighth
worst county in the United States among the 100 largest counties.
Moving from Chicago proper to the western suburbs of Chicago at
birth would increase a child’s household income by $7,510 a year
on average, a 28.8% increase. This comparison is of particular in-
terest in light of a well-known 1976 U.S. Supreme Court ruling,
Hills v. Gautreaux, which required that the Chicago Housing Au-
thority provide residents living in high poverty housing projects
in Cook County an opportunity to move to lower-poverty neigh-
borhoods in the suburbs, many of which were in DuPage County.
Observational studies comparing the outcomes of families who ac-
cepted offers to move to the suburbs to those who chose to remain
in the city (e.g., Rosenbaum 1995) have found that children whose
families moved to the suburbs had signiﬁcantly better economic
outcomes. The interpretation of these ﬁndings have been debated
because the families who chose to move may have had better unob-
servables (θi in equation (1)). Our ﬁndings support the view that
the gains observed for families who moved as part of Gautreaux
reﬂect the causal impact of growing up in DuPage County instead
of Cook County.
2. Estimates for High-Income Families. For children in above
median income (p = 75) families, the best county in the United
States is Fairfax, VA, which produces an income gain of 11.0%, and
the worst county is Palm Beach, FL, which produces an income
loss of 13.0%. Mirroring the CZ-level results, the degree of vari-
ation in outcomes across counties is generally smaller at p = 75
than p = 25, and there is a weak positive correlation between μ f
25,c
and μ f
75,c. For example, in Figure IV, the city of Boston produces
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 45 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1207
worse outcomes (even for children in rich families) than Middle-
sex County; similarly, in New York, Manhattan produces worse
outcomes than Hudson County.
3. Heterogeneity by Gender. The places that generate the best
outcomes for boys generally generate the best outcomes for girls
as well (Online Appendix Figures V and VI), but there is a thick
lower tail of counties that produce particularly negative outcomes
for boys in low income families (Online Appendix Figure VII).
For instance, growing up in Baltimore City from birth reduces
household income by 27.9% for boys relative to the mean, but only
5.4% for girls (Online Appendix Tables VII– X). One explanation
for why certain areas produce extremely low incomes for boys is
that males in these areas are particularly likely to be incarcerated,
and individuals who are incarcerated are included in our sample
with zero or very low incomes.36
VII. CHARACTERISTICS OF HIGH-OPPORTUNITY AREAS
What are the characteristics of places that produce high levels
of upward mobility? Prior work has shown that in observational
data, upward mobility is highly correlated with several factors:
residential segregation, income inequality, the fraction of single
mothers, social capital, school quality, and racial shares (Sampson,
Morenoff, and Gannon-Rowley 2002; Chetty et al. 2014). These
correlations could reﬂect two very different phenomena. One pos-
sibility is that they are predictive of places’ causal effects: for
instance, growing up in a more segregated area may cause worse
economic outcomes for a given child (lower μpc) (Wilson 1987;
Sampson 2012). Another possibility is that they capture sorting:
the types of people who live in more segregated places may have
different characteristics θi. Distinguishing between these two ex-
planations is critical for understanding what types of areas pro-
duce the greatest economic opportunity, as opposed to simply at-
tracting upwardly mobile people.
In this section, we decompose the correlations documented
in prior work into causal versus sorting components by cor-
relating local area characteristics with both our causal effect
36. Chetty et al. (2016) further explore heterogeneity in intergenerational
mobility by gender and show that areas with concentrated poverty and crime
have particularly negative impacts on the incomes and employment rates of boys
growing up in low-income families.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 46 ---
1208
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
estimates ˆμpc, based on movers, and permanent residents’ out-
comes ¯ypc, which combine both causal effects and selection effects.
This analysis identiﬁes the factors associated with the production
of upward mobility; however, we caution that it does not show that
these factors themselves have a direct causal effect on upward
mobility.37
We organize our analysis into three parts. First, we analyze
correlations between the incomes of children in low-income fami-
lies (μ25, c) and area characteristics that are deﬁned at the group
level: segregation, inequality, school quality, social capital. We
then examine correlations between μ25, c and demographic char-
acteristics that are aggregates of variables deﬁned at the individ-
ual level: the fraction of single mothers, immigrant shares, and
racial shares. We ﬁnd that correlations between the group-level
characteristics and upward mobility are driven almost entirely by
causal effects of place, whereas a substantial portion of the corre-
lations between the individual-level demographic aggregates and
upward mobility is due to selection. Finally, we examine correla-
tions between these factors and outcomes for children growing up
in high-income families (μ75, c). In the interest of space, we focus
on a subset of correlations that illustrate the key results, shown in
Figures V (p = 25) and VI (p = 75). A comprehensive set of correla-
tions with 40 area-level characteristics is presented in Appendix
Tables XI– XIV.
VII.A. Group-Level Characteristics
1. Segregation. We measure racial segregation across cen-
sus tracts within each CZ using a Theil index Hc, which quan-
tiﬁes the extent to which the racial distribution in each Cen-
sus tract differs from the overall racial distribution in the CZ
(Chetty et al. 2014, equation 4).38 We begin by examining the
association between permanent residents’ outcomes ¯y25,c and
Hc, as in prior observational studies. The vertical tick mark
in the ﬁrst row of Figure V, Panel A shows that growing
37. For instance, we show later that more segregated places produce worse
outcomes for low-income children. This does not necessarily imply that policies
which reduce segregation will increase upward mobility, because more segregated
places may have other characteristics that lead to worse outcomes (such as weaker
schools).
38. The characteristics analyzed in this section are taken primarily from
Chetty et al. (2014, Online Data Table 8); we provide detailed deﬁnitions and
sources for all of the variables we use in Online Appendix Table XV of this article.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 47 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1209
FIGURE V
Predictors of Place Effects for Children with Parents at 25th Percentile
Panel A plots coefﬁcients from univariate OLS regressions of permanent res-
ident outcomes ¯y25,c and causal effects ˆμ25,c for below-median income families
(p = 25) on various CZ-level characteristics (xc), weighting by population. The
characteristics are normalized to have a (population-weighted) mean zero and
unit standard deviation across CZs. Both ¯y25,c and ˆμ25,c are rescaled so the co-
efﬁcients can be interpreted as impacts in percentage units using the approach
described in Section V.B. The vertical tick marks plot coefﬁcients from regressions
of ¯y25,c on xc. The solid bars plot coefﬁcients from regressions of the causal effect
of growing up in an area from birth (20 years of exposure), 20 ˆμ25,c, on xc. The
difference between the tick mark and the bar (depicted by the dashed horizontal
line) therefore represents the coefﬁcient from a regression of ¯y25,c −20 ˆμ25,c on the
covariate xc, which can be interpreted as the association between selection effects
and the covariate. The numbers on the right report the correlations between μ25, c
and xc, which are obtained by dividing the coefﬁcient from regressing 20 ˆμ25,c on
xc by 20 times the standard deviation of μ25, c (from Table II). Panel B presents
analogous estimates at the county-within-CZ level, standardizing the covariates
to have (population-weighted) mean 0 and unit standard deviation across coun-
ties within CZs, and estimating regressions at the county level controlling for CZ
ﬁxed effects. Point estimates and standard errors for the characteristics shown in
this ﬁgure are provided in Online Appendix Tables XI and XII, along with results
for additional characteristics. Deﬁnitions of the covariates are provided in Online
Appendix Table XV.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 48 ---
1210
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
up in a CZ with one standard deviation higher segregation
is associated with a 5.2% reduction in children’s incomes for
families at p = 25 ( ¯y25,c).39 We estimate this 5.2% effect in three
steps. First, we normalize Hc into standard deviation units by
dividing the raw value of the index by its population-weighted
standard deviation across CZs. Next, we regress ¯y25,c on the stan-
dardized value of Hc, weighting by CZ population. Finally, we
multiply the regression coefﬁcient by 3.14 to translate the per-
centile impact into percentage impacts on incomes, as in Section
V.B.
To determine how much of this 5.2% effect is due to causal
effects of place versus sorting, we repeat the preceding exercise
using the causal effect of growing up in an area from birth (20 ×
ˆμ25,c) as the outcome.40 We estimate that growing up in a one
standard deviation more segregated CZ from birth reduces a given
child’s income by 4.2%, depicted by the solid bar in Figure V, Panel
A. Hence, 4.2
5.2 = 80.8% of the association between segregation and
permanent residents’ outcomes reﬂects the causal effect of place.
Under our modeling assumption that place effects μpc do not vary
between movers and permanent residents, the remaining 19.2%
of the association—depicted by the dashed line in Figure V, Panel
A reﬂects sorting, that is, the association between ¯θ25,c = ¯y25,c −
20 ˆμ25,c and Hc.41
This analysis shows that the majority of the association be-
tween segregation and upward mobility across CZs documented
in prior work can be explained by the causal effect of place rather
than sorting. The (population-weighted) correlation between the
latent causal effect μ25, c and Hc is −0.51 (shown on the right
side of Figure V, Panel A), implying that segregation explains a
signiﬁcant portion of the variation in children’s outcomes across
39. Standard errors for all of the estimates shown in Figures V and VI are
given in Online Appendix Tables XI and XII. All of the estimates discussed below
are statistically signiﬁcant with p < .05 unless otherwise noted.
40. We multiply the annual exposure effect estimates by 20 to obtain impacts
from birth for the reasons described in Section IV.A; using other plausible scaling
factors (e.g., 15 or 23) yields qualitatively similar results.
41. If the underlying causal effects μpc vary across movers and permanent
residents for example, because movers tend to live in different neighborhoods
within CZs relative to permanent residents then 20 ˆμ25,c would not capture the
causal effect of place for permanent residents. In this case, the “selection” term
¯y25,c −20 ˆμ25,c would also capture the difference between place effects for perma-
nent residents and movers.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 49 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1211
CZs.42 We ﬁnd similar results using measures of income segrega-
tion. The correlation between a Theil index of income segregation
and μ25, c is −0.57 (Online Appendix Table XI).
We also ﬁnd a strong negative correlation with measures of
sprawl, which is strongly associated with segregation. The corre-
lation between the fraction of people with a commute time less
than 15 minutes and μ25, c is 0.88. This is the single largest cor-
relation we ﬁnd across all 40 covariates we analyzed. Growing up
in a CZ that is one standard deviation lower in the distribution of
sprawl (as measured by commute times) would increase a given
child’s income by more than 7% on average.
In Figure V, Panel B, we replicate the analysis in Panel A
across counties within CZs. We obtain these county-within-CZ es-
timates by estimating regressions analogous to those described
above at the county level, including CZ ﬁxed effects and normal-
izing each covariate to have a standard deviation of one across
counties within CZs. Segregation remains a strong predictor of
causal effects at the county level: the correlation between racial
segregation and μ25, c is −0.37 across counties within CZs. How-
ever, the sorting component is larger at the county level: more
than two-thirds of the association between segregation and per-
manent residents’ outcomes ¯y25,c is due to sorting. This ﬁnding is
consistent with the intuition that families seeking better opportu-
nities for their children are more likely to sort within rather than
between labor markets.
In sum, our analysis strongly supports the hypothesis that
growing up in a more segregated area—that is, in a neighbor-
hood with concentrated poverty—is detrimental for disadvan-
taged youth. However, the mechanisms underlying our ﬁndings
diverge from some of the theories posited in prior work. For in-
stance, some studies have proposed that segregation is associated
with worse outcomes for the poor because of spatial mismatch in
access to jobs (Kain 1968; Kasarda 1989; Wilson 1996), an expla-
nation that may appear particularly plausible given the strong
correlation between upward mobility and commute times. How-
ever, the fact that our causal effect estimates ˆμ25,c are identiﬁed
from differences in childhood exposure is inconsistent with this
42. We estimate this correlation as Corr(μ25,c, Hc) = Corr( ˆμ25,c, Hc) SD( ˆμ25,c)
SD(μ25,c),
where the ratio of standard deviations is obtained from Table II and adjusts for
the attenuation in Corr( ˆμ25,c, Hc) due to sampling error in the raw ﬁxed effect
estimates ˆμ25,c.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 50 ---
1212
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
theory. Our analysis shows that moving to a more sprawling, seg-
regated city at an earlier age (e.g., 10 instead of 12) reduces a
child’s income in adulthood, demonstrating that these effects can-
not be directly driven by a lack of access to jobs in adulthood.
Moreover, we ﬁnd a strong negative association between popula-
tion density and μ25, c, showing that urban areas, which have more
jobs, tend to be worse for upward mobility. Overall, these ﬁndings
are more consistent with theories that emphasize peer effects or a
lack of resources as an explanation for why growing up in a more
segregated area reduces upward mobility.
2. Income Inequality. CZs and counties with greater income
inequality produce signiﬁcantly worse outcomes for children in
low-income families. At the CZ level, the correlation between μ25, c
and the Gini coefﬁcient is −0.76. Growing up from birth in an area
with a one standard deviation higher Gini coefﬁcient reduces a
given child’s income by 6.4%. Interestingly, this effect is larger
than the −4.2% effect observed for permanent residents. Under
the assumption that the causal effect μpc is the same for movers
and permanent residents, it follows that the sorting component
¯θ25,c offsets the causal component μ25, c in observational data. That
is, residents of areas with high levels of income inequality tend to
have better unobservables ¯θ25,c, leading prior observational stud-
ies (e.g., Chetty et al. 2014) to understate the association between
inequality and upward mobility.
This offsetting pattern of selection and causal effects is par-
ticularly stark when we focus on upper-tail inequality, measured
by the share of households in each CZ who are in the top 1%
of the national income distribution. Growing up in an area with
one standard deviation greater upper-tail inequality reduces the
incomes of children in low income families by 4.1%, an estimate
that is signiﬁcant with p < .01 (Online Appendix Table XI). In
contrast, the effect on ¯y25,c is only 1.0% and is not statistically sig-
niﬁcant. These ﬁndings are inconsistent with Chetty et al.’s (2014,
p. 1557) hypothesis that “the factors that erode the middle class
may hamper intergenerational mobility more than the factors that
lead to income growth in the upper tail” based on their analysis
of observational data. On the contrary, both upper-tail inequal-
ity and middle-class inequality are strongly negatively associated
with causal effects on upward mobility; it is just that the effect of
upper-tail inequality is masked by selection in observational data.
These results shed light on the determinants of the Great
Gatsby curve, the widely noted negative correlation between
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 51 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1213
inequality and intergenerational mobility (Krueger 2012; Corak
2013). The fact that inequality is negatively correlated with μ25, c
implies that the Great Gatsby curve is not driven by differ-
ences in genetics or other characteristics of populations in ar-
eas with different levels of inequality. Rather, placing a given
child in an area with higher levels of inequality makes that
child less likely to rise up in the income distribution, showing
that areas with greater income inequality generate less upward
mobility.43
3. Education. At both the CZ- and county-level, we ﬁnd strong
correlations between μ25, c and output-based proxies for K–12
school quality, such as test scores and high school dropout rates
controlling for parent income. We ﬁnd weaker correlations with
input-based measures of school quality, such as class size and ex-
penditures per student. As with the other factors analyzed above,
most of the association between proxies for school quality and per-
manent residents’ outcomes ¯y25,c is due to the causal component
μ25, c rather than the sorting component ¯θ25,c.
Turning to higher education, we ﬁnd that CZs with more
colleges per capita tend to produce better outcomes μ25, c, with a
correlation of 0.60. As with upper-tail inequality, this association
is masked when one compares permanent residents’ outcomes ¯y25,c
across areas because of selection effects.
4. Social Capital. Growing up in a CZ with more social cap-
ital, as measured by the social capital index of Rupasingha and
Goetz (2008), improves children’s outcomes signiﬁcantly (correla-
tion = 0.70). This causal component accounts for virtually all of
the correlation between social capital and permanent residents’
outcomes observed in prior work (e.g., Chetty et al. 2014). We also
ﬁnd a signiﬁcant negative association between μ25, c and violent
crime rates across CZs (Online Appendix Table XI). At the county-
within-CZ level, we do not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant association between
μ25, c and the social capital index, but continue to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant
relationship with violent crime rates.
Together, the factors discussed here explain 58% of the vari-
ance in μ25, c across CZs and 24% of the variance across counties
within CZs. These results imply that the places that produce good
43. Moreover, the gap in causal effects between children from low and high–
income families (μ75, c −μ25, c) is larger in areas with greater inequality, especially
among smaller CZs. That is, areas with greater inequality also produce greater
intergenerational persistence of income.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 52 ---
1214
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
outcomes share a common set of traits, increasing the likelihood
that their successes may be replicable in other areas.44
VII.B. Individual-Level Demographic Characteristics
We now turn to a set of characteristics that are aggregates of
individual-level demographics.
1. Family Structure. In observational data, the strongest pre-
dictor of differences in rates of upward mobility across CZs is the
fraction of single mothers (Chetty et al. 2014a). A one standard
deviation increase in the fraction of single mothers is associated
with a 7.6% reduction in the incomes of children of permanent res-
idents at p = 25 ( ¯y25,c). However, when we examine areas’ causal
effects on upward mobility, we ﬁnd that a one standard devia-
tion increase in the fraction of single mothers reduces a given
child’s income (μ25, c) by only 4.7%. Hence, 38% of the association
between single parenthood rates and upward mobility in observa-
tional data is explained by selection. Across counties within CZs,
selection accounts for nearly 70% of the association between the
fraction of single mothers and ¯y25,c.
Selection may play a larger role in explaining the correlation
between the fraction of single mothers and ¯y25,c than factors such
as school quality and social capital because the fraction of sin-
gle mothers is simply an aggregation of a household-level demo-
graphic characteristic. Insofar as such characteristics have direct
effects on children’s outcomes, they must mechanically capture
selection effects, that is, differences in the types of families living
in different areas. In contrast, school quality and the other area-
level factors analyzed in the previous subsection do not have such
a mechanical selection component.
Despite the importance of selection, the fraction of single
mothers remains a strong predictor of the causal effect μ25, c, with
a correlation of −0.57 across CZs and −0.38 across counties within
CZs. However, it is no longer the strongest predictor of differences
in upward mobility, because measures of segregation, inequality,
and social capital are as or more highly correlated with μ25, c than
the fraction of single mothers.
44. The fact that much of the variance in places’ causal effects can be explained
by observables is noteworthy because efforts to explain causal effects in other
settings based on ex ante observables, such as teachers’ value added, have been
much less successful (e.g., Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff 2014a).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 53 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1215
2. Immigrant Shares. Another important demographic char-
acteristic that is strongly associated with upward mobility is im-
migrant status. The children of certain immigrant groups, such as
Asians, have higher rates of upward mobility than the children of
natives, perhaps because immigrant parents tend to have lower
observed incomes relative to their latent ability. Consistent with
this intuition, we ﬁnd a strong positive association between the
fraction of immigrants in an area (measured using census data)
and the sorting component ( ¯θ25,c = ¯y25,c −20 ˆμ25,c). That is, per-
manent residents in areas with large immigrant populations do
better than one would expect based on our estimates of the causal
effects of those places, consistent with the results for Los Angeles
and New York shown in Figure I.
Areas with larger immigrant shares also have more nega-
tive causal effects μ25, c on average (correlation = −0.45), perhaps
because they have other attributes (such as higher population
density or greater inequality) that are negatively associated with
μ25, c. Because the causal and selection effects work in opposite
directions, immigrant shares are not signiﬁcantly associated with
permanent residents’ outcomes ¯y25,c, matching the observational
ﬁndings of Chetty et al. (2014). These results echo the ﬁndings
for single mothers in the sense that selection plays a key role in
understanding the relationship between immigrant shares and
upward mobility in observational data.
3. Racial Shares. The last demographic factor we consider
is race. Areas with a larger share of black residents have much
lower rates of upward mobility in observational data (Chetty et al.
2014). Across CZs, a one standard deviation increase in the black
share is associated with a 7.5% reduction in ¯y25,c and a 4.3% reduc-
tion in μ25, c. As with the fraction of single mothers, this implies
that about half of the association between black shares and up-
ward mobility across CZs in observational data is driven by factors
unrelated to the causal effects of CZs. These could include other
factors that cause lower rates of upward mobility for blacks than
whites, such as racial discrimination in the labor market, or dif-
ferences in the types of low-income white families who live in CZs
with large black populations.45
45. Lacking data on race at the individual level, we cannot distinguish between
these two explanations. Rothbaum (2016) uses SIPP-SSA linked data to show that
upward mobility varies across racial groups within CZs and that controlling for
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 54 ---
1216
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Despite these points, the black share remains a strong pre-
dictor of the causal effect μ25, c, with a correlation of −0.51 across
CZs and −0.32 across counties within CZs. An important impli-
cation of this result is that African American children grow up in
areas that tend to produce worse economic outcomes. Under our
maintained assumption that place effects are not heterogeneous
by race or other characteristics, our estimates of μ25, c imply that
black children grow up in counties that produce 5.3% lower in-
comes than nonblacks on average. This suggests that residential
segregation by race thus ampliﬁes racial inequality across gener-
ations.
VII.C. Predictors of Place Effects for High-Income Families
We turn now to the characteristics of areas that produce
good outcomes for children in high-income families (μ75, c). Be-
cause μ25, c and μ75, c are highly positively correlated across CZs
(Table II), one might expect the strongest correlates of μ25, c to be
highly correlated with μ75, c as well. Indeed, we ﬁnd that CZs with
less residential segregation, higher quality education (as mea-
sured by test scores as well as class sizes), greater social capi-
tal, and less income inequality produce better outcomes for high-
income children (Figure VI, Panel A). However, μ75, c is not sig-
niﬁcantly correlated with black shares and single-parent shares,
perhaps because these demographic factors are more reﬂective of
the characteristics of low-income populations in each area.
Although μ25, c and μ75, c are positively correlated across CZs,
μ25, c and μ75, c are essentially uncorrelated across counties within
CZs. Correspondingly, the factors that strongly predict μ25, c at the
county level do not predict μ75, c. In general, the correlations be-
tween the causal effect μ75, c and the factors we examine are quite
small in magnitude and statistically insigniﬁcant at the county
level (Figure VI, Online Appendix Table XIV). There are, however,
signiﬁcant correlations between permanent residents’ outcomes in
high-income families ¯y75,c and county-level characteristics, which
are driven primarily by selection effects. For example, a one stan-
dard deviation increase in test scores (controlling for income) is
associated with a 2.1% increase in permanent residents’ incomes.
However, the causal effect of growing up in a county with one
standard deviation higher test scores is only 0.15%, implying that
race at the individual level reduces the degree of variation in intergenerational
mobility across CZs.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 55 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1217
FIGURE VI
Predictors of Place Effects for Children with Parents at 75th Percentile
This ﬁgure replicates Figure V using children in above-median income families
(p = 75) instead of below-median income families (p = 25); see notes to Figure V
for details.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 56 ---
1218
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
93% of the correlation observed for permanent residents is driven
by selection. This ﬁnding suggests that for high-income families,
places that have schools that are ostensibly of higher quality (as
measured by test score performance) may not in fact produce bet-
ter outcomes; they only appear to be better because they have a
positively selected group of children.
Comparing the correlations at p = 25 and p = 75 shown in
Figures V and VI, we see clearly that the types of areas that pro-
duce better outcomes for the poor generally produce better (or at
least no worse) outcomes for the rich. Most notably, there is no
evidence that more residentially integrated areas are harmful for
children in high-income families. Segregation is negatively cor-
related with μ75, c across CZs and uncorrelated with μ75, c across
counties within CZs.
VIII. HOUSING COSTS AND OPPORTUNITY BARGAINS
How much more does a family have to pay to live in an area
that produces better outcomes for their children? In this section,
we examine how opportunity for children is priced in the housing
market.
VIII.A. Methods
Letting rpc denote the average rent paid by families at per-
centile p in area c, we characterize the relationship between rpc
and μpc in two ways. First, we measure how much it costs on av-
erage to live in a place that produces higher incomes for children
by estimating the conditional expectation of rents given an area’s
causal effect, E[rpc|μpc]. Second, we measure the extent to which
a family could ﬁnd a place that produces better outcomes for their
children without paying more rent by estimating the variance in
rents explained by places’ causal effects, R2 = Var(E[rpc|μpc])
Var(rpc)
.46
If areas’ causal effects μpc were directly observed, these pa-
rameters could be estimated (under a linear approximation) using
46. We use rents in our baseline speciﬁcations instead of house prices because
most low-income families rent and it is more straightforward to compare income
gains for children to ﬂow rental costs than house prices. We ﬁnd qualitatively
similar results using house prices, with a negative correlation between house
prices and μpc across CZs and very small correlations across counties within CZs
(Online Appendix Tables XI and XII).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 57 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1219
the following OLS regression:
(13)
rpc = α + βpμpc + ζpc.
Since μpc is not observed, we estimate the conditional expectation
βp by replacing μpc with μr
pc =
σ 2
μpc
σ 2μpc +s2pc ˆμpc, the MSE-minimizing
forecast of each place’s causal effect using data purely on movers.47
This regression yields an unbiased estimate of βp under the iden-
tiﬁcation assumption in equation (3).48 Intuitively, the shrinkage
factor
σ 2
μpc
σ 2μpc +s2pc adjusts for the fact that the raw causal effects ˆμpc
are noisy estimates of μpc, leading to attenuation bias in βp in a
regression of rpc on ˆμpc.
Similarly, we estimate the variance in rents explained by μpc
(R2) using
R = Corr(rpc, μpc) =
Cov(rpc, μpc)
SD(rpc)SD(μpc) =
Cov(rpc, ˆμpc)
SD(rpc)SD( ˆμpc)
SD( ˆμpc)
SD(μpc),
where
SD( ˆμpc)
SD(μpc) is computed using the total and signal standard
deviations reported in Table II. Intuitively, the signal R2 can be
computed from the correlation between rents and ˆμpc, again ad-
justing for attenuation due to noise in the causal effect estimates.
We scale μr
pc in terms of the percentage change in income
per year of childhood exposure, as in Section V.B. We measure
monthly rents using data from the 2000 census, deﬁning the rent
in each CZ or county as the mean of the median rent in each census
tract, weighting by the number of families with children who have
47. When estimating equation (13) at the CZ level, we construct the shrinkage
factor
σ 2μpc
σ 2μpc +s2pc using the estimates of σμpc of 0.13 at p = 25 and 0.11 at p = 75
(Table II, columns (1) and (2)). When estimating equation (13) at the county-
within-CZ level, we construct the shrinkage factor using the county-within-CZ
signal standard deviation of 0.10 at p = 25 and and 0.11 at p = 75 (Table II,
columns (5) and (6)).
48. Formally,
Cov(rpc,μrpc)
Var(μrpc)
= β because
Cov(μpc,μrpc)
Var(μrpc)
= 1 and Cov(ζpc, μr
pc) = 0.
Unlike in Section VI, we do not use data on permanent residents when constructing
the forecasts here because rents may be correlated with the selection component
of permanent resident outcomes ¯θpc, leading to a biased estimate of βp. Indeed,
we ﬁnd that the association between rents and ¯y25,c is larger than the association
between rents and ˆμ25,c (Online Appendix Table XI), implying that families with
positive unobservables tend to select into high-priced areas.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 58 ---
1220
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE V
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN RENTS AND PLACES’ CAUSAL EFFECTS ON CHILDREN’S INCOMES
FOR LOW-INCOME FAMILIES
Dep. var.: Mean monthly rent for low-income families ($)
CZs
Counties within CZs
Counties in 100 Observable Unobservable
All counties
largest CZs
component
component
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Causal effect (1% increase
−102.9
176.8**
202.4**
in child’s income)
(82.91)
(65.50)
(64.93)
Observable component
430.2***
(27.29)
Unobservable component
46.18
(42.65)
Mean of dependent variable 797.02
811.49
884.67
876.94
876.94
Signal R-squared
0.180
0.013
0.051
0.301
0.000
Number of observations
595
2,367
694
673
673
Notes. This table shows estimates from OLS regressions of average monthly rents on areas’ causal effects
for children in below-median income (p = 25) families. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Rents are
measured using data from the 2000 census (in 2012 dollars), and are deﬁned as the mean of median rents
across census tracts, weighting by the number of below-median income families with children. Causal effects
are MSE-minimizing forecasts constructed purely using data on movers (excluding permanent residents) and
scaled in terms of percentage changes in children’s incomes in adulthood per year of childhood exposure to a
given CZ or county. All regressions are weighted by population based on the 2000 Census. In column (1), we
regress rents on causal effects across CZs; the coefﬁcient implies that CZs that generate 1% higher earnings
for a single year of exposure have $102.9 lower monthly rents on average. Columns (2)–(5) report estimates of
regressions at the county level, including CZ ﬁxed effects. Column (2) includes all CZs, while columns (3)–(5)
restrict the sample to the 100 most highly populated CZs (with populations above 590,000). In column (4), the
independent variable is the “observable” component of causal effects, the predicted values from a regression
of the raw ﬁxed effect estimates on the following area-level characteristics: the fraction of African American
residents, the Theil index of racial segregation, the Gini index, the fraction of single parents, the social capital
index, and expenditures on public schools per student. In column (5), the independent variable is the residual
from the preceding regression, shrunk based on the signal-to-noise ratio as described in the text to account
for sampling error. In each column, we also report the mean of the dependent variable (monthly rent for low-
income families) and the signal R-squared, constructed as the square of the correlation between rents and
the right-hand-side variable (after removing CZ ﬁxed effects in columns (2)–(5)). The R-squared estimates
in columns (1)–(3) and (5) are adjusted for noise using the signal to noise ratio as described in the text.
∗∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗p < 0.05, ∗p < 0.1.
below-median income for p = 25 and above-median income for
p = 75 (see Online Appendix Table XV). We weight all regressions
and correlations by population in the 2000 census.
VIII.B. Relationship Between Rents and Children’s Outcomes
Column (1) of Table V reports estimates of equation (13) at the
CZ level at p = 25; results at p = 75 are qualitatively similar and
are presented in Online Appendix Table XVI. CZs that produce
1% higher incomes for children have $103 lower monthly rents on
average. This is consistent with our ﬁnding that rural areas, such
as the Great Plains, tend to produce better outcomes than urban
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 59 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1221
areas. Of course, rural areas also tend to have fewer job opportu-
nities and lower wage rates, so moving to such CZs may not be
a plausible margin of choice for most families. Therefore, in the
remainder of this section, we focus on variation across counties
within a given CZ. Because CZs are constructed to approximate
local labor markets (Tolbert and Sizer 1996), a household’s loca-
tion decision within a CZ aligns more closely with the conceptual
exercise of determining the price of better outcomes for children
while holding parents’ job opportunities and wage rates ﬁxed.
In column (2), we estimate the relationship between rents
and children’s outcomes across counties within a CZ by estimating
equation (13) at the county level, including CZ ﬁxed effects. On
average, moving to a county that produces 1% higher income a
year of exposure for children costs $177 more in monthly rent. To
interpret the magnitude of this coefﬁcient, note that a 1% increase
in income translates to approximately a $4,900 increase in lifetime
income for a child with parents at p = 25 in present value at age
10 (the middle of childhood) using a 3% discount rate (see Online
Appendix D). Hence, a family with two children stands to gain
approximately $10,000 in the present value of future income by
moving to a county that produces 1% better outcomes. This is
four times larger than the 12 × $177 = $2,124 mean increase in
annual rent associated with moving to a county that increases
children’s incomes by 1%.
The fraction of the variance in rents explained by μ25.c (or,
equivalently, the fraction of the variance in μ25, c explained by
rents) is R2 < 2% across counties within a CZ. Even among the
100 most highly populated CZs (population > 590,000), where
housing supply is likely to be most constrained, β25=$202 and
R2 = 5% (column (3) of Table V).49
The relatively weak relationship between rents and children’s
outcomes suggests that policies that encourage low-income fami-
lies to move to more expensive areas may not be sufﬁcient to im-
prove their children’s outcomes. For example, current “small area”
fair market rent proposals in housing voucher programs vary
49. Among these large CZs, the rent gradient is steeper in more sprawling, res-
identially segregated areas. In CZs with above-median commute times, β25 = $255,
compared with β25 = −$66 in CZs with below-median commute times. The greater
price of access to high-opportunity neighborhoods could potentially explain why
more segregated, sprawling cities tend to generate worse outcomes for children in
low-income families.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 60 ---
1222
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
FIGURE VII
Opportunity Bargains in the New York Area
This ﬁgure plots the MSE-minimizing forecasts of causal effects, μ f
25,c, for coun-
ties in the New York combined statistical area (shown in Figure IV, Panel A)
versus average monthly rents for low-income families. The forecasted causal ef-
fects μ f
25,c are scaled to show the percentage change in income from growing up
from birth (i.e., 20 years of childhood exposure) in a given county relative to the
average county in the country. See notes to Figure IV, Panel A for further de-
tails on construction of μ f
25,c. Monthly rents are measured using data from the
2000 census (in 2012 dollars) and are deﬁned as the mean of median rents across
census tracts, weighting by the number of families with children who have below-
median income. The solid line shows the best-ﬁt line obtained from regressing μ f
25,c
on rents, weighting by county population. Points above the line are “opportunity
bargains”—counties that produce particularly good outcomes for children relative
to other counties with comparable rents.
voucher payments with neighborhoods’ rents rather than their
impacts on economic outcomes. Such policies may not maximize
vouchers’ effects on upward mobility, because many expensive ar-
eas do not have high levels of μ25, c. Indeed, our results imply that
there are many “opportunity bargains”—counties within a labor
market that offer good outcomes for children with relatively low
rents.
Figure VII illustrates these ﬁndings by plotting our optimal
forecasts μ f
25,c (scaled as the percentage impact of growing up in a
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 61 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1223
given county from birth relative to the national mean) versus rents
for counties in the New York City CSA. The substantial disper-
sion in this scatter plot around the mildly upward-sloping best-ﬁt
line illustrates the key empirical results of this section: on aver-
age, moving to a better area does not cost much more, and there
is considerable residual variation in children’s outcomes that is
orthogonal to rents. For example, Hudson County offers much
better outcomes for low-income children than does Manhattan,
despite having comparable rents. More generally, there are many
counties—in the upper left of the ﬁgure—that offer “opportunity
bargains” within the New York area.
The existence of these opportunity bargains may be encour-
aging for families seeking to improve their children’s prospects for
upward mobility as well as for policy makers looking for affordable
areas that produce good outcomes as models to emulate. However,
the existence of such areas demands further explanation from the
perspective of economic models of spatial equilibrium, as these
areas seemingly offer arbitrage opportunities that have been left
unexploited. We turn to explaining these empirical results in the
next subsection.
VIII.C. Explaining Opportunity Bargains
Why are places’ effects on children’s future incomes not capi-
talized more fully into housing prices? We discuss three potential
explanations for this result in this subsection.
First, the areas that appear to be opportunity bargains may
have other disamenities that make them less desirable places to
live. Our data suggest that such disamenities explain at least part
of the residual variation in children’s opportunities conditional on
rents. The areas that generate the best outcomes for children
in most cities are typically in the suburbs—which tend to have
longer commutes and offer fewer urban amenities—as illustrated
by the maps for New York and Boston in Figure IV. However,
data from the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) experiment suggest
that such disamenities do not fully explain the existence of op-
portunity bargains. MTO families who received housing vouchers
to move to low-poverty census tracts exhibited gains in both chil-
dren’s long-term outcomes and parents’ subjective well-being and
neighborhood satisfaction (Ludwig et al. 2012; Chetty, Hendren,
and Katz 2016). These ﬁndings suggest that affordable neighbor-
hoods that produce better outcomes for children in low-income
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 62 ---
1224
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
families are not necessarily less desirable to parents because of
other disamenities.
A second potential explanation for why children’s opportu-
nities are not fully priced in the housing market is a lack of in-
formation. Families may not know which areas produce the best
outcomes for children, particularly because there is a long de-
lay in observing these outcomes. To evaluate this hypothesis, we
divide place effects μ25, c into an “observable” component that is
related to attributes families can observe, such as school quality
and poverty rates, and an “unobservable” component unrelated to
these factors. We estimate these components by regressing ˆμ25,c
(at the county level) on the fraction of African American residents,
the Theil index of racial segregation, the Gini index, the fraction of
single mothers, the social capital index, and expenditures on pub-
lic schools per student.50 We then deﬁne the observable component
as the predicted value from this regression and the unobservable
component as the residual, which we shrink by its signal-to-noise
ratio as above to adjust for attenuation bias. Thirty percent of the
signal variance in μ25, c is captured by the observable component;
the remaining 70% is “unobservable” given these predictors.
In columns (4) and (5) of Table V, we replicate the speciﬁ-
cation in column (3), regressing rents on the observed and un-
observed components of place effects. We obtain an estimate of
β25 = $430 for the observed component. Hence, moving to a CZ
that generates a 1% ($4,900) increase in lifetime income for a
child along the “observed” dimension—for instance, an area with
better-funded schools and more two-parent families—costs $5,160
in terms of annual rent on average. In contrast, there is no signif-
icant relationship between prices and the “unobservable” compo-
nent (column (5)). These ﬁndings suggest that the causal effects
μ25, c may be underpriced partly because of a lack of information.51
50. We use these factors because they are highly predictive of children’s out-
comes, as shown in Figure V, and are in principle easily observed by families.
However, including additional variables from the set in Figure V does not af-
fect the results. We estimate the regression at the county level with CZ ﬁxed
effects, restricting the sample to counties in the 100 most highly populated CZs
and weighting by the county population.
51. One may be concerned that the unobservable component is highly tran-
sitory, in which case “opportunity bargains” could only be identiﬁed ex post after
children become adults rather than when families are deciding where to live. Em-
pirically, this does not turn out to be the case. The unobservable component has
a precision-weighted signal correlation of 0.42 with permanent residents’ mean
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 63 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1225
A third explanation for the existence of opportunity bargains
is failures in optimization due to cognitive constraints or behav-
ioral biases. Recent ethnographic studies show that low-income
families frequently move under time pressure, either because they
have been evicted (Desmond 2016) or because they are making a
“reactive” move responding to a ﬁnancial or health shock (DeLuca,
Rosenblatt, and Wood 2013). In such circumstances, families often
seek shelter as quickly as possible rather than weighing the ben-
eﬁts that may accrue to their children several years later if they
choose a different neighborhood (DeLuca, Rosenblatt, and Wood
2013). Moreover, the decision of where to live has several features
that may trigger well-established behavioral biases and induce
suboptimal choice: delayed payoffs coupled with large initial up-
front costs that compound present bias, a need to predict one’s
preferences in a very different environment that may induce pro-
jection bias, and complex planning with scarce mental bandwidth
(Chetty 2015, section IV.B).
We believe that these explanations—disamenities, a lack of
information, and behavioral biases—are likely to play a role in
explaining the existence of opportunity bargains. Understanding
the relative importance of these theories is an important area for
future research.
IX. CONCLUSION
This article has estimated the causal effect of each county in
the United States on children’s outcomes in adulthood. Overall,
the ﬁndings provide support for place-focused approaches to im-
proving economic opportunity, by helping families move to oppor-
tunity and through place-based investments. The estimates show
that there is substantial scope for households to move to areas
within their labor market (CZ) that are opportunity bargains—
places that produce better outcomes for children without paying
higher rents. In addition, the areas that produce high levels of
upward mobility share a common set of characteristics, such as
less residential segregation and greater social capital, suggesting
that their successes might be replicable in other areas.
ranks at p = 25. Permanent residents’ mean ranks in turn have a serial corre-
lation exceeding 0.93 across cohorts, implying that one could reliably predict the
unobservable component even while children are growing up based on observed
outcomes for earlier cohorts.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 64 ---
1226
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
There are two key areas for further research before one can
apply these ﬁndings to make policy changes that improve chil-
dren’s outcomes. First, it would be useful to estimate places’
causal effects at narrower geographies (e.g., census tracts) and
for speciﬁc subgroups (e.g., by race and ethnicity) using the meth-
ods developed here. Such estimates would provide more granu-
lar data for families seeking to move to opportunity within their
cities and for policy makers seeking to make targeted investments
in neighborhoods that currently produce lower levels of upward
mobility.
Second, it would be useful to understand the mechanisms
through which some places produce better outcomes than others
by isolating exogenous variation in the predictors of upward mo-
bility identiﬁed here. For example, studying changes in local poli-
cies that have reduced residential segregation could shed light on
whether segregation directly harms children in low-income fam-
ilies. To facilitate further investigation of these mechanisms, we
have made all of the county- and CZ-level estimates of causal
effects constructed in this study available on the Equality of Op-
portunity Project website.52
STANFORD
UNIVERSITY
AND
NATIONAL
BUREAU
OF
ECONOMIC
RESEARCH
HARVARD
UNIVERSITY
AND
NATIONAL
BUREAU
OF
ECONOMIC
RESEARCH
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
An Online Appendix for this article can be found at The Quar-
terly Journal of Economics online. Code used to generate tables
and ﬁgures in this article can be found in Chetty and Hendren
(2018b), in the Harvard Dataverse, doi:10.7910/DVN/CEMFTJ.
52. In addition to the estimates discussed in this article, we provide estimates
for other outcomes and subgroups, such as college attendance rates and estimates
for children in one- versus two-parent households. For all outcomes, we provide
estimates of both the raw ﬁxed effect estimates ˆμpc and optimal forecasts μ f
pc, as
the appropriate measure of place effects will vary across applications. As a rule
of thumb, those seeking to use the causal effect as a dependent variable should
use ˆμpc, while those seeking to use the causal effect as an independent variable
should use μ f
pc.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 65 ---
NEIGHBORHOODS AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II
1227
REFERENCES
Abadie, Alberto, and Maximilian Kasy, “The Risk of Machine Learning,” Working
Paper, 2017.
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis, “High Wage Workers
and High Wage Firms,” Econometrica, 67 (1999), 251–333.
Angrist, Joshua D., Peter D. Hull, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R. Walters,
“Leveraging Lotteries for School Value-Added: Testing and Estimation,” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, 132 (2017), 871–919.
Chetty, Raj, “Behavioral Economics and Public Policy: A Pragmatic Perspective,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 105 (2015), 1–33.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff, “Measuring the Impacts
of Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates,” American
Economic Review, 104 (2014a), 2593–2632.
———, “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher Value-Added and Student
Outcomes in Adulthood,” American Economic Review, 104 (2014b), 2633–2679.
Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren, “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Inter-
generational Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 133 (2018a), 1107–1162.
———, “Replication Code for: ‘The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects’ and ‘The Impacts of Neighborhoods
on Intergenerational Mobility II: County-Level Estimates’,” 2018b. Harvard
Dataverse, doi:10.7910/DVN/CEMFTJ.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Effects of Expo-
sure to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Mov-
ing to Opportunity Experiment,” American Economic Review, 106 (2016),
855–902.
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez, “Where Is the Land of Opportunity?
The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 129 (2014), 1553–1623.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Frina Lin, Jeremy Majerovitz, and Ben-
jamin
Scuderi,
“Childhood
Environment
and
Gender
Gaps
in
Adult-
hood,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 106 (2016),
282–288.
Corak, Miles, “Income Inequality, Equality of Opportunity, and Intergenerational
Mobility,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27 (2013), 79–102.
Cutler, David M., and Edward L. Glaeser, “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 112 (1997), 827–872.
DeLuca, Stefanie, Peter Rosenblatt, and Holly Wood, “Why Poor People Move (and
Where They Go): Residential Mobility, Selection and Stratiﬁcation,” Working
Paper, 2013.
Desmond, Matthew. Evicted: Poverty and Proﬁt in the American City (New York:
Crown, 2016).
Haider, Steven, and Gary Solon, “Life-Cycle Variation in the Association between
Current and Lifetime Earnings,” American Economic Review, 96 (2006), 1308–
1320.
Hilger, Nathaniel, “Upward Mobility and Discrimination: The Case of Asian Amer-
icans,” NBER Working Paper no. 22748, 2016.
Hull, Peter, “Estimating Hospital Quality with Quasi-experimental Data,” Work-
ing Paper, 2017.
Kain, John F., “Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metropolitan De-
centralization,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 82 (1968), 175–197.
Kasarda, John D., “Urban Industrial Transition and the Underclass,” Annals of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 501 (1989), 26–47.
Krueger, Alan, “The Rise and Consequences of Inequality in the United States.”
Speech at the Center for American Progress, Washington, DC, January 12,
2012.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C.
Kessler, Jeffrey R. Kling, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu, “Neighborhood Effects on
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 66 ---
1228
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
the Long-Term Well-Being of Low-Income Adults,” Science, 337 (2012), 1505–
1510.
Massey, Douglas S., and Nancy A. Denton, American Apartheid: Segregation and
the Making of the Underclass (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1993).
Robbins, Herbert, “An Empirical Bayes Approach to Statistics,” in Proceedings of
the Third Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability,
Volume 1: Contributions to the Theory of Statistics (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1956), 157–163.
Rosenbaum, James E., “Changing the Geography of Opportunity by Expanding
Residential Choice: Lessons from the Gautreaux Program,” Housing Policy
Debate, 6 (1995), 231–269.
Rothbaum, Jonathan, “Sorting and Geographic Variation in Intergenerational Mo-
bility,” SEHSD Working Paper, 2016.
Rupasingha, Anil, and Stephan J. Goetz, “US County-Level Social Capital Data,
1990–2005,” Northeast Regional Center for Rural Development, 2008.
Sampson, Robert J., Great American City: Chicago and the Enduring Neighbor-
hood Effect (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012).
Sampson, Robert J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Thomas Gannon-Rowley, “Assess-
ing Neighborhood Effects: Social Processes and New Directions in Research,”
Annual Review of Sociology, 28 (2002), 443–478.
Solon, Gary, “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market,” in Handbook of
Labor Economics, volume 3, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds. (Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 1999), 1761–1800.
Solon, Gary, Marianne E. Page, and Greg J. Duncan, “Correlations between Neigh-
boring Children in Their Subsequent Educational Attainment,” Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics, 82 (2000), 383–392.
Tolbert, Charles M., and Molly Sizer, “U.S. Commuting Zones and Labor Market
Areas: A 1990 update,” Economic Research Service Staff Paper, 9614 (1996).
Wilson, William J., The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and
Public Policy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987).
Wilson, William J., When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor (New
York: Knopf, 1996).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/133/3/1163/4850659 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 67 ---
CALL FOR NOMINATIONS
Northwestern University invites nominations for the Erwin Plein Nemmers Prize in Economics, to be 
awarded during the 2026–27 academic year. The prize pays the recipient $300,000. Recipients of the 
Nemmers Prize present lectures, participate in department seminars, and engage with Northwestern faculty 
and students in other scholarly activities.
Details about the prize and the nomination process can be found at nemmers.northwestern.edu. Candidacy 
for the Nemmers Prize is open to those with careers of outstanding achievement in their disciplines as 
demonstrated by major contributions to new knowledge or the development of significant new modes of 
analysis.Individuals of all nationalities and institutional affiliations are eligible except current or recent 
members of the Northwestern University faculty and past recipients of the Nemmers or Nobel Prize. 
Nominations will be accepted until January 14, 2026.
The Nemmers prizes are made possible by a generous gift to Northwestern University by the late Erwin Esser 
Nemmers and the late Frederic Esser Nemmers.
$300,000 Nemmers Prize in Economics 
Nemmers Prizes • Office of the Provost • Northwestern University • Evanston, Illinois 60208
nemmers.northwestern.edu
