--- Page 1 ---
arXiv:1404.0243v1  [q-fin.GN]  1 Apr 2014
Physics and Financial Economics (1776-2014)
Puzzles, Ising and Agent-Based models
D. Sornette1,2
1ETH Zurich – Department of Management, Technology and Economics, Scheuchzerstrasse 7, CH-8092 Zurich, Switzerland
2Swiss Finance Institute, 40, Boulevard du Pont-d’ Arve, Case Postale 3, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
E-mail address: dsornette@ethz.ch
Abstract
This short review presents a selected history of the mutual fertil-
ization between physics and economics, from Isaac Newton and Adam
Smith to the present. The fundamentally diﬀerent perspectives em-
braced in theories developed in ﬁnancial economics compared with
physics are dissected with the examples of the volatility smile and
of the excess volatility puzzle. The role of the Ising model of phase
transitions to model social and ﬁnancial systems is reviewed, with the
concepts of random utilities and the logit model as the analog of the
Boltzmann factor in statistic physics. Recent extensions in term of
quantum decision theory are also covered.
A wealth of models are
discussed brieﬂy that build on the Ising model and generalize it to
account for the many stylized facts of ﬁnancial markets. A summary
of the relevance of the Ising model and its extensions is provided to
account for ﬁnancial bubbles and crashes. The review would be incom-
plete if it would not cover the dynamical ﬁeld of agent based models
(ABMs), also known as computational economic models, of which the
Ising-type models are just special ABM implementations. We formu-
late the “Emerging Market Intelligence hypothesis” to reconcile the
pervasive presence of “noise traders” with the near eﬃciency of ﬁnan-
cial markets. Finally, we note that evolutionary biology, more than
physics, is now playing a growing role to inspire models of ﬁnancial
markets.
Keywords: Finance, physics, econophysics, Ising model, phase transitions,
excess volatility puzzle, logit model, Boltzmann factor, bubbles, crashes,
adaptive markets, ecologies
JEL: A12, B41, C00; C44; C60; C73; D70; G01
1


--- Page 2 ---
Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
A short history of mutual fertilization between physics and
economics
6
2.1
From Isaac Newton to Adam Smith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Pareto and power laws . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Brownian motion and random walks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Stable L´evy distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Power laws after Mandelbrot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Full distribution, positive feedbacks, inductive reasoning
. . .
11
3
Thinking as an economist or as a physicist?
12
3.1
Puzzles and normative science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
The volatility smile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
The excess volatility puzzle: thinking as an economist . . . . .
14
4
The Ising model and ﬁnancial economics
17
4.1
Roots and sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Random utilities, Logit model and Boltzmann factor
. . . . .
18
4.3
Quantum decision theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Discrete choice with social interaction and Ising model
. . . .
24
5
Generalized kinetic Ising model for ﬁnancial economics
27
6
Ising-like imitation of noise traders and models of ﬁnancial
bubbles and crashes
32
6.1
Phenomenology of ﬁnancial bubbles and crashes . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
The critical point analogy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.3
Tests with the ﬁnancial crisis observatory . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.4
The social bubble hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7
Agent-based models (ABMs) in economics and ﬁnance
37
7.1
A taste of ABMs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.2
Outstanding open problems: robustness and calibration/validation
of agent-based models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3
The “Emerging Market Intelligence Hypothesis”
. . . . . . .
46
8
Concluding remarks
49
2


--- Page 3 ---
1
Introduction
The world economy is an extremely complex system with hidden causali-
ties rooted in intensive social and technological developments. Critical events
in such systems caused by endogenous instabilities can lead to huge crises
wiping out of the wealth of whole nations. On the positive side, positive
feedbacks of education and venture capital investing on entrepreneurship can
weave a virtuous circle of great potential developments for the future gen-
erations. Risks, both on the downside as well as on the upside, are indeed
permeating and controlling the outcome of all human activities and require
high priority.
Traditional economic theory is based on the assumptions of rationality of
economic agents and of their homogeneous beliefs, or equivalently that their
aggregate behaviors can be represented by a representative agent embodying
their eﬀective collective preferences. However, many empirical studies pro-
vide strong evidences on market agents heterogeneity and on the complexity
of market interactions. Interactions between individual market agents for
instance cause the order book dynamics, which aggregate into rich statistical
regularities at the macroscopic level. In ﬁnance, there is growing evidence
that equilibrium models and the eﬃcient market hypothesis (EMH), see sec-
tion 7.3 for an extended presentation and generalisation, cannot provide a
fully reliable framework for explaining the stylized facts of price formation
(Fama, 1970). Doubts are further fuelled by studies in behavioral economics
demonstrating limits to the hypothesis of full rationality for real human be-
ings (as opposed to the homo economicus posited by standard economic the-
ory). We believe that a complex systems approach to research is crucial to
capture the inter-dependent and out-of-equilibrium nature of ﬁnancial mar-
kets, whose total size amounts to at least 300% of the world GDP and of the
cumulative wealth of nations.
From the risk management point of view, it is now well established that
the Value-at-Risk measure, on which prudential Basel I and II recommen-
dations are based, constitutes a weak predictor of the losses during crises.
Realized and implied volatilities as well as inter-dependencies between assets
observed before the critical events are usually low, thus providing a com-
pletely misleading picture of the coming risks. New risk measures that are
sensitive to global deteriorating economic and market conditions are yet to
be fully developed for better risk management.
In todays high-tech era, policy makers often use sophisticated computer
models to explore the best strategies to solve current political and economic
issues. However, these models are in general restricted to two classes: (i) em-
pirical statistical methods that are ﬁtted to past data and can successfully be
3


--- Page 4 ---
extrapolated a few quarters into the future as long as no major changes oc-
cur; and (ii) dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models (DSGE), which
by construction assume a world always in equilibrium. The DSGE-models
are actively used by central banks, which in part rely on them to take im-
portant decisions such as ﬁxing interest rates. Both of these methods as-
sume that the acting agents are fully rational and informed, and that their
actions will lead to stable equilibria. These models therefore do not encom-
pass out-of-equilibrium phenomena such as bubbles and subsequent crashes
(Kindleberger, 2000; Sornette, 2003), arising among other mechanisms from
herding among not fully rational traders (De Grauwe, 2010). Consequently,
policy makers such as central banks base their expectations on models and
processes that do not contain the full spectrum of possible outcomes and are
caught oﬀguard when extreme events such as the ﬁnancial crisis in 2008 oc-
cur (Colander et al., 2009). Indeed, during and following the ﬁnancial crisis
of 2007-2008 in the US that cascaded to Europe in 2010 and to the world,
central bankers in top policy making positions, such as Trichet, Bernanke,
Turner and many others, have expressed signiﬁcant dissatisfaction with eco-
nomic theory in general and macroeconomic theory in particular, suggesting
even that their irrelevance in times of crisis.
Physics as well as other natural sciences, in particular evolutionary bi-
ology and environmental sciences, may provide inspiring paths to break the
stalemate. The analytical and computational concepts and tools developed
in physics in particular are starting to provide important frameworks for a
revolution that is in the making. We refer in particular to the computa-
tional framework using agent-based or computational economic models. In
this respect, let us quote Jean-Claude Trichet, the previous chairman of the
European Central Bank in 2010: First, we have to think about how to char-
acterize the homo economicus at the heart of any model. The atomistic,
optimizing agents underlying existing models do not capture behavior dur-
ing a crisis period. We need to deal better with heterogeneity across agents
and the interaction among those heterogeneous agents. We need to entertain
alternative motivations for economic choices. Behavioral economics draws on
psychology to explain decisions made in crisis circumstances. Agent-based
modeling dispenses with the optimization assumption and allows for more
complex interactions between agents.
Such approaches are worthy of our
attention. And, as Alan Kirman (2012) stressed recently, computational or
algorithmic models have a long and distinguished tradition in economics.
The exciting result is that simple interactions at the micro level can generate
sophisticated structure at the macro level, exactly as observed in ﬁnancial
time series. Moreover, such ABMs are not constrained to equilibrium condi-
tions. Out-of-equilibrium states can naturally arise as a consequence of the
4


--- Page 5 ---
agents’ behavior, as well as fast changing external conditions and impacting
shocks, and lead to dramatic regime shift or tipping points. The fact that
such systemic phenomena can naturally arise in agent based models makes
this approach ideal to model extreme events in ﬁnancial markets. The em-
phasis on ABMs and computational economics parallels a similar revolution
in Physics that developed over the last few decades. Nowadays, most physi-
cists would agree that Physics is based on three pillars: experiments, theory
and numerical simulations, deﬁning the three inter-related disciplines of ex-
perimental physics, theoretical physics and computational physics.
Many
scientists have devoted their life in just one of these three. In comparison,
computational economics and agent-based models are still in their infancy
but with similar promising futures.
Given the above mentioned analogies and relationships between economics
and physics, it is noteworthy that these two ﬁelds have been life-long compan-
ions during their mutual development of concepts and methods emerging in
both ﬁelds. There has been much mutual enrichment and catalysis of cross-
fertilization. Since the beginning of the formulation of the scientiﬁc approach
in the physical and natural sciences, economists have taken inspiration from
physics, in particular in its success in describing natural regularities and pro-
cesses. Reciprocally, physics has been inspired several times by observations
done in economics.
This review aims at providing some insights on this relationship, past,
present and future.
In the next section, we present a selected history of
mutual fertilization between physics and economics. Section 3 attempts to
dissect the fundamentally diﬀerent perspectives embraced in theories devel-
oped in ﬁnancial economics compared with physics.
For this, the excess
volatility puzzle is presented and analyzed in some depth. We explain the
meaning of puzzles and the diﬀerence between empirically founded science
and normative science. Section 4 reviews how the Ising model of phase tran-
sitions has developed to model social and ﬁnancial systems. In particular, we
present the concept of random utilities and derive the logit model describing
decisions made by agents, as being the analog of the Boltzmann factor in sta-
tistical physics. The Ising model in its simplest form can then be derived as
the optimal strategy for boundedly rational investors facing discrete choices.
The section also summarises the recent developments on non-orthodox de-
cision theory, called quantum decision theory. Armed with these concepts,
section 5 reviews non-exhaustively a wealth of models that build on the Ising
model and generalize it to account for the many stylized facts of ﬁnancial
markets, and more, with still a rich future to enlarge the scope of the investi-
gations. Section 6 brieﬂy reviews our work on ﬁnancial bubbles and crashes
and how the Ising model comes into play. Section 7 covers the literature on
5


--- Page 6 ---
agent-based models, of which the class of Ising models can be considered a
sub-branch. This section also presents the main challenges facing agent-based
modelling before being widely adopted by economists and policy makers. We
also formulate the “Emerging Market Intelligence hypothesis”, to explain the
pervasive presence of “noise traders” together with the near eﬃciency of ﬁ-
nancial markets. Section 8 concludes with advice on the need to combine
concepts and tools beyond physics and ﬁnance with evolutionary biology.
2
A short history of mutual fertilization be-
tween physics and economics
Many physicists and economists have reﬂected on the relationships be-
tween physics and economists.
Let us mention some prominent accounts
(Zhang, 1999; Bouchaud, 2001; Derman, 2004; Farmer and Lux, 2010). Here,
we consider rather the history of the inter-fertilisation between the two ﬁelds,
providing an hopefully general inspiring perspective especially for the physi-
cist aspiring to work in economics and ﬁnance.
2.1
From Isaac Newton to Adam Smith
To formulate his “Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations”, Adam Smith (1776) was inspired by the Philosophiae Naturalis
Principia Mathematica (1687) of Isaac Newton, which speciﬁcally stresses
the (novel at the time) notion of causative forces. In the ﬁrst half of the
nineteenth century, Quetelet and Laplace among others become fascinated
by the regularities of social phenomena such as births, deaths, crimes and
suicides, even coining the term “social physics” to capture the evidence for
natural laws (such as the ubiquitous Gaussian distribution based on the law
of large numbers and the central limit theorem) that govern human social
systems such as the economy.
2.2
Equilibrium
In the second half of the 19th century, the microeconomists Francis Edge-
worth and Alfred Marshall drew on the concept of macroequilibrium in gas,
understood to be the result of the multitude of incessant micro-collisions
of gas particles, which was developed by Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltz-
mann. Edgeworth and Marshall thus developed the notion that the economy
achieves an equilibrium state not unlike that described for gas. In the same
way that the thermodynamic description of a gas at equilibrium produces a
6


--- Page 7 ---
mean-ﬁeld homogeneous representation that gets rid of the rich heterogeneity
of the multitude of micro-states visited by all the particles, the dynamical
stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models used by central banks for in-
stance do not have agent heterogeneity and focus on a representative agent
and a representative ﬁrm, in a way parallel to the Maxwell Garnett eﬀec-
tive medium theory of dielectrics and eﬀective medium approximations for
conductivity and wave propagation in heterogenous media. In DSGE, equi-
librium refers to clearing markets, such that total consumption equal output,
or total demand equals total supply, and this takes place between represen-
tative agents. This idea, which is now at the heart of economic modeling,
was not accepted easily by contemporary economists who believed that the
economic world is out-of-equilibrium, with heterogeneous agents who learn
and change their preferences as a function of circumstances. It is important
to emphasize that the concept of equilibrium, which has been much criticized
in particular since the advent of the “great ﬁnancial crisis” since 2007 and
of the “great recession”, was the result of a long maturation process with
many ﬁghts within the economic profession. In fact, the general equilibrium
theory now at the core of mainstream economic modeling is nothing but a
formalization of the idea that “everything in the economy aﬀects everything
else” (Krugman, 1996), reminiscent of mean-ﬁeld theory or self-consistent ef-
fective medium methods in physics. However, economics has pushed further
than physics the role of equilibrium by ascribing to it a normative role, i.e.,
not really striving to describe economic systems as they are, but rather as
they should be (Farmer and Geanakoplos, 2009).
2.3
Pareto and power laws
In his “Cours d’Economie Politique” (1897), the economist and philoso-
pher Vilfredo Pareto reported remarkable regularities in the distribution of
incomes, described by the eponym power laws, which have later become the
focus of many natural scientists and physicists attracted by the concept of
universality and scale invariance (Stanley, 1999). Going beyond Gaussian
statistics, power laws belong to the class of “fat-tailed” or sub-exponential
distributions.
One of the most important implications of the existence of the fat-tail
nature of event size distributions is that the probability of observing a very
large event is not negligible, contrary to the prediction of the Gaussian world,
which rules out for all practical purposes events with sizes larger than a few
standard deviations from the mean.
Fat-tailed distributions can even be
such that the variance and even the mean are not deﬁned mathematically,
corresponding the wild class of distributions where the presence of extreme
7


--- Page 8 ---
event sizes is intrinsic.
Such distributions have later been documented for many types of systems,
when describing the relative frequency of the sizes of events they generate,
for instance earthquakes, avalanches, landslides, storms, forest ﬁres, solar
ﬂares, commercial sales, war sizes, and so on (Mandelbrot, 1982; Bak, 1996;
Newman, 2005; Sornette, 2004). Notwithstanding the appeal for a univer-
sal power law description, the reader should be warned that many of the
purported power law distributions are actually spurious or only valid over a
rather limited range (see e.g. Sornette, 2004; Perline, 2005; Clauset et al.,
2009). Moreover, most data in ﬁnance show strong dependence, which inval-
idates simple statistical tests such as the Kolmogorov Smirnov test (Clauset
et al., 2009). A drastically diﬀerent view point is oﬀered by multifractal pro-
cesses, such as the multifractal random walk (Bacry et al., 2001; 2013; Muzy
et al., 2001; 2006), in which the multiscale two-point correlation structure of
the volatility is the primary construction brick, from which derives the power
law property of the one-point statistics, i.e. the distribution of returns (Muzy
et al., 2006). Moreover, the power law regime may even be superseded by
a diﬀerent “dragon-king” regime in the extreme right tail (Sornette, 2009;
Sornette and Ouillon, 2012).
2.4
Brownian motion and random walks
In order to model the apparent random walk motion of bonds and stock
options in the Paris stock market, mathematician Louis Bachelier (1900)
developed in his thesis the mathematical theory of diﬀusion (and the ﬁrst el-
ements of ﬁnancial option pricing). He solved the parabolic diﬀusion equation
ﬁve years before Albert Einstein (1905) established the theory of Brownian
motion based on the same diﬀusion equation, also underpinning the theory of
random walks. These two works have ushered research on mathematical de-
scriptions of ﬂuctuation phenomena in statistical physics, of quantum ﬂuctu-
ation processes in elementary particles-ﬁelds physics, on the one hand, and of
ﬁnancial prices on the other hand, both anchored in the random walk model
and Wiener process. The geometric Brownian motion (GBM) (exponential
of a standard random walk) was introduced by Osborne (1959) on empirical
grounds and Samuelson (1965) on theoretical grounds that prices cannot be-
come negative and price changes are proportional to previous prices. Cootner
(1964) compiled strong empirical support for the GBM model of prices and
its associated log-normal distribution of prices, corresponding to Gaussian
distributions of returns. The GBM model has become the backbone of ﬁnan-
cial economics theory, underpinning many of its fundamental pillars, such
as Markowitz’ portfolio theory (Markowitz, 1952), Black-Scholes-Merton op-
8


--- Page 9 ---
tion pricing formula (Black and Scholes, 1973; Merton, 1973) and the Capital
Asset Pricing Model (Sharpe, 1964) and its generalized factor models of as-
set valuations (Fama and French, 1993; Carhart, 1997). Similarly, it is not
exaggerated to state that much of physics is occupied with modeling ﬂuctu-
ations of (interacting) particles undergoing some kind of correlated random
walk motion. As in physics, empirical analyses of ﬁnancial ﬂuctuations have
forced the introduction of a number of deviations from the pure naive random
walk model, in the form of power law distribution of log-price increments,
long-range dependence of their absolute values (intermittency and cluster-
ing) and absence of correlation of returns, multifractality of the absolute
value of returns (multi-scale description due to the existence of information
cascades) (Mandelbrot, 1997; Mandelbrot et al., 1997; Bacry et al., 2001)
and many others (Chakraborti et al., 2011). A profusion of models have
been introduced to account for these observations, which build on the GBM
model.
2.5
Stable L´evy distributions
In the early 1960s, mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot (1963) pioneered
the use in Financial Economics of heavy-tailed distributions (stable L´evy
laws), which exhibit power law tails with exponent less than 21, in con-
trast with the traditional Gaussian (Normal) law..
Several economists at
the University of Chicago (Merton Miller, Eugene Fama, Richard Roll), at
MIT (Paul Samuelson) and at Carnegie Mellon University (Thomas Sargent)
were initially attracted by Mandelbrot’s suggestion to replace the Gaussian
framework by a new one based on stable L´evy laws.
In his PhD thesis,
Eugene Fama conﬁrmed that the frequency distribution of the changes in
the logarithms of prices was “leptokurtic”, i.e., with a high peak and fat
tails. However, other notable economists (Paul Cootner and Clive Granger)
strongly opposed Mandelbrot’s proposal, based on the argument that “the
statistical theory that exists for the normal case is nonexistent for the other
members of the class of Lvy laws.” Actually, Fama (1965), Samuelson (1967)
and later Bawa et al. (1979) extended Markowitz’ portfolio theory to the case
of stable Paretian markets, showing that some of the standard concepts and
tools in ﬁnancial economics have a natural generation in the presence of
power laws. This last statement has been made ﬁrmer even in the presence
of non-stable power law tail distributions by Bouchaud et al. (1998). How-
1Heavy-tailed distributions are deﬁned in the mathematical literature (Embrechts et al.,
1997) roughly speaking by exhibiting a probability density function (pdf) with a power
law tail of the form pdf(x) ∼1/x1+µ with 0 < µ < 2 so that the variance and other
centered moments of higher orders do not exist.
9


--- Page 10 ---
ever, the interest in stable L´evy laws faded as empirical evidence mounted
rapidly to show that the distributions of returns are becoming closer to the
Gaussian law at time scales larger than one month, in contradiction with
the self-similarity hypothesis associated with the L´evy laws (Campbell et
al., 1997; MacKenzie, 2006). In the late 1960s, Benoit Mandelbrot mostly
stopped his research in the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial economics. However, inspired by
his forays on the application of power laws to empirical data, he went on to
show that non-diﬀerentiable geometries (that he coined “fractal”), previously
developed by mathematicians (Weierstrass, H¨older, Hausdorﬀamong others)
from the 1870s to the 1940s, could provide new ways to deal with the real
complexity of the world (Mandelbrot, 1982). This provided an inspiration
for the econophysicists’ enthusiasm starting in the 1990s to model the mul-
tifractal properties associated with the long-memory properties observed in
ﬁnancial asset returns (Mandelbrot et al., 1997; Mandelbrot, 1997; Bacry et
al., 2001; 2013; Muzy et al., 2001; 2006; Sornette et al., 2003).
2.6
Power laws after Mandelbrot
Much of the eﬀorts in the econophysics literature of the late 1990s and
early 2000s revisited and reﬁned the initial 1963 Mandelbrot hypothesis on
heavy-tailed distribution of returns, conﬁrming on the one hand the existence
of the variance (which rules out the class of L´evy distributions proposed
by Mandelbrot), but also suggesting a power law tail with an exponent µ
close to 3 (Mantegna and Stanley, 1995; Gopikrishnan et al., 1999). Note
however that several other groups have discussed alternatives, such as expo-
nential (Silva et al. (2004) or stretched exponential distributions (Laherrere
and Sornette, 1999). Moreover, Malevergne et al. (2005) and Malevergne
and Sornette (2006; Chapter 2) developed an asymptotic statistical theory
showing that the power law distribution is asymptotically nested within the
larger family of stretched exponential distributions, allowing the use of the
Wilks log-likelihood ratio statistics of nested hypotheses in order to decide
between power law and stretched exponential for a given data set. Similarly,
Malevergne et al. (2011) developed a uniformly most powerful unbiased test
to distinguish between the power law and log-normal distributions, whose
statistics turns out to be simply the sample coeﬃcient of variation (the ratio
of the sample standard deviation (std) to the sample mean of the logarithm
of the random variable).
Financial engineers actually care about these technicalities because the
tail structure controls the Value-at-Risk and other risk measures used by
regulators as well as investors to assess the soundness of ﬁrms as well as the
quality of investments. Physicists care because the tail may constrain the un-
10


--- Page 11 ---
derlying mechanism(s). For instance, Gabaix et al. (2003) attribute the large
movements in stock market activity to the interplay between the power-law
distribution of the sizes of large ﬁnancial institutions and the optimal trading
of such large institutions. Levy and Levy (2003) and Levy (2005) similarly
emphasize the importance of the Pareto wealth distribution in explaining
the distribution of stock returns, pointing out that the Pareto wealth dis-
tribution, market eﬃciency, and the power law distribution of stock returns
are closely linked and probably associated with stochastic multiplicative pro-
cesses (Sornette and Cont, 1997; Sornette, 1998a; Malevergne and Sornette,
2001; Huang and Solomon, 2002; Solomon and Richmond, 2002; Malcai et
al., 2002; Lux and Sornette, 2002; Saichev et al., 2010). However, another
strand of literature emphasizes that most large events happen at relatively
high frequencies, and seem to be triggered by a sudden drop in liquidity
rather than to an outsized order (Farmer et al., 2004; Weber and Rosenow,
2006; Gillemot et al., 2007; Joulin et al., 2008).
2.7
Full distribution, positive feedbacks, inductive rea-
soning
In a seminal Nobel prize winning article, Anderson (1958) laid out the
foundation of the physics of heterogenous complex systems by stressing the
need to go beyond the standard description in terms of the ﬁrst two mo-
ments (mean and variance) of statistical distributions. He pointed out the
importance of studying their full shape in order to account for important rare
large deviations that often control the long-term dynamics and organization
of complex systems (dirty magnetic systems, spin-glasses). In the same vein,
Gould (1996) has popularized the need to look at the “full house”, the full
distribution, in order to explain many paradoxes in athletic records as well
as in the biology of evolution. The study of spinglasses (M´ezard et al., 1987)
and of out-of-equilibrium self-organizing complex systems (Strogatz, 2003;
Sornette, 2004; Sethna, 2006) have started to inspire economists to break
the stalemate associated with the concept of equilibrium, with emphasis on
positive feedbacks and increasing returns (Arthur, 1994a; 1997; 2005; Krug-
man, 1996) and on inductive bottom-up organizational processes (Arthur,
1994b; Challet et al., 2005). This is in contrast with the deductive top-down
reasoning most often used in economics, leading to the so-called “normative”
approach of economics, which aims at providing recipes on how economies
should be, rather than striving to describe how they actually are.
11


--- Page 12 ---
3
Thinking as an economist or as a physicist?
3.1
Puzzles and normative science
Economic modeling (and ﬁnancial economics is just a branch following
the same principles) is based on the hunt for paradoxes or puzzles. The term
puzzle refers to problems posed by empirical observations that do not conform
to the predictions based on theory. Many puzzles have been unearthed by
ﬁnancial economists. One of the most famous of these paradoxes is called
the excess volatility puzzle, which was discovered by Shiller (1981;1989) and
LeRoy and Porter (1981).
A puzzle emerges typically by the following procedure. A ﬁnancial mod-
eler builds a model or a class of models based on a pillar of standard eco-
nomic thinking, such as eﬃcient markets, rational expectations, represen-
tative agents, and so on.
She then draws some prediction that is then
tested statistically, often using linear regressions on empirical data. A puz-
zle emerges when there is a strong divergence or disagreement between the
model prediction and the regressions, so that something seems at odds, liter-
ally “puzzling” when viewed from the interpreting lenses of the theory. But
rather than rejecting the model as the falsiﬁcation process in physics dic-
tates (Dyson, 1988), the ﬁnancial modeler is excited because she has hereby
identiﬁed a new “puzzle”: the puzzle is that the “horrible” reality (to quote
Huxley) does not conform to the beautiful and parsimonious (and norma-
tive) theoretical ediﬁce of neo-classical economic thinking. This is a puzzle
because the theory should not be rejected, it cannot be rejected, and there-
fore the data has something wrong in it, or there are some hidden eﬀects that
have to be taken into account that will allow the facts to conﬁrm the theory
when properly treated. In the most generous acceptation, a puzzle points
to improvements to bring to the theory. But the remarkable thing remains
that the theory is not falsiﬁed. It is used as the deforming lens to view and
interpret empirical facts.
This rather critical account should be balanced with the beneﬁts obtained
from studying “puzzles” in economics. Indeed, since it has the goal of for-
malising the behavior of individuals and of organisations striving to achieve
desired goals in the presence of scarce resources, economics has played and
is still playing a key role in helping policy makers shape their decision when
governing organisation and nations. To be concerned with how things should
be may be a good idea, especially with the goal of designing “better” sys-
tems. If and when reality deviates from the ideal, this signals to economists
the existence of some “friction” that needs to be considered and possibly
alleviated. Frictions are important within economics and, in fact, are often
12


--- Page 13 ---
modelled.
3.2
The volatility smile
This ideology is no better illustrated than by the concept of the “volatility
smile”. The celebrated Black-Scholes-Merton pricing formula calculates the
value of options, derivatives deﬁned on underlying assets, such as the Euro-
pean call option that gives the right but not the obligation for its holder to
buy the underlying stock at some ﬁxed exercise price K at a ﬁxed maturity
time T in the future (Black and Scholes, 1973; Merton, 1973). In addition to
the exercise price K and the time T −t to maturity counted from the present
time t, the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing formula depends on several other
parameters, namely the risk-free interest rate, the volatility σ of the returns
of the underlying asset as well as its present price p(t).
As recounted by MacKenzie (2006), the spreading use of the Black-
Scholes-Merton pricing formula associated with the opening of the Chicago
Board Options Exchange in 1973 led to a progressive convergence of traded
option prices to their Black-Scholes theoretical valuation, legitimizing and
catalyzing the booming derivative markets. This developed nicely until the
crash of 19 October 1987, which, in one stroke, broke for ever the validity of
the formula. Since that day, one literally fudges the Black-Scholes-Merton
formula by adjusting the volatility parameter to a value σimplied such that
the Black-Scholes-Merton formula coincides with the empirical price. The
corresponding volatility value is called “implied”, because it is the value of σ
needed in the formula, and thus “implied” by the markets, in order for theory
and empirics to agree. The volatility smile refers to the fact that σimplied is
not a single number, not even a curve, but rather a generally convex surface,
function of both K and T −t: in order to reconcile the failing formula, one
needs fudged values of σ for all possible pairs of K and T −t traded on the
market for each underlying asset.
This is contrast to the theory that assumes a single unique ﬁxed value
representing the standard deviation of the returns of the underlying asset.
The standard ﬁnancial rationale is that the volatility smile σimplied(K, T −t)
quantiﬁes the aggregate market view on risks. Rather than improving the
theory, the failed formula is seen as the engine for introducing an eﬀective
risk metric that gauges the market risk perception and appetites.
More-
over, the volatility smile surface σimplied(K, T −t) depends on time, which is
interpreted as reﬂecting the change of risk perceptions as a function of eco-
nomic and market conditions. This is strikingly diﬀerent from the physical
approach, which would strive to improve or even cure the Black-Scholes-
Merton failure (Bouchaud and Sornette, 1994; Bouchaud and Potters, 2003)
13


--- Page 14 ---
by accounting for non-Gaussian features of the distribution of returns, long-
range dependence in the volatility as well as other market imperfections that
are neglected in the standard Black-Scholes-Merton theory.
The implied volatility type of thinking is so much ingrained that all
traders and investors are trained in this way, think according to the risks
supposedly revealed by the implied volatility surface and develop correspond-
ingly their intuition and operational implementations. By their behaviors,
the traders actually justify the present use of the implied volatility surface
since, in ﬁnance, if everybody believes in something, it will happen by their
collective actions, called self-fulﬁlling prophecies. It is this behavioral bound-
edly rational feedback of traders’ perception on risk taking and hedging that
is neglected in the Black-Scholes-Merton theory.
Actually, Potters et al.
(1998) showed, by studying in detail the market prices of options on liquid
markets, that the market has empirically corrected the simple, but inade-
quate Black-Scholes formula to account for the fat tails and the correlations
in the scale of ﬂuctuations. These aspects, although not included in the pric-
ing models, are found very precisely reﬂected in the price ﬁxed by the market
as a whole.
Sircar and Papanicolaou (1998) showed that a partial account of this
feedback of hedging in the Black-Scholes theory leads to increased volatil-
ity. Wyart and Bouchaud (2007) formulated a nice simple model for self-
referential behavior in ﬁnancial markets where agents build strategies based
on their belief of the existence of correlation between some ﬂow of informa-
tion and prices. Their belief followed by action makes the former realized
and may produce excess volatility and regime shifts that can be associated
with the concept of convention (Orl´ean, 1995).
3.3
The excess volatility puzzle: thinking as an economist
As another illustration of the fundamental diﬀerence between how economists
and physicists construct models and analyze empirical data, let us dwell fur-
ther on the “excess volatility puzzle” discovered by Shiller (1981;1989) and
LeRoy and Porter (1981), according to which observed prices ﬂuctuate much
too much compared with what is expected from their fundamental valuation.
Physics uses the concept of causality: prices should derive from funda-
mentals. Thus, let us construct our best estimate for the fundamental price
p∗(t).
The price, which should be a “consequence” of the fundamentals,
should be an approximation of it. The physical idea is that the dynamics of
agents in their expectations and trading should tend to get the right answer,
14


--- Page 15 ---
that is, p(t) should be an approximation of p∗(t). Thus, we write
p(t) = p∗(t) + ǫ′(t) ,
(1)
and there is no excess volatility paradox. The large volatility of p(t) com-
pared with p∗(t) provides an information on the price forming processes, and
in particular tells us that the dynamics of price formation is not optimal
from a fundamental valuation perspective. The corollary is that prices move
for other reasons than fundamental valuations and this opens the door to
investigating the mechanisms underlying price ﬂuctuations.
In contrast, when thinking in equilibrium, the notion of causality or cau-
sation ceases to a large degree to play a role in ﬁnance. According to ﬁnance,
it is not because the price should be the logical consequence of the fundamen-
tals that it should derive from it. In contrast, the requirement of “rational
expectations” (namely that agents’ expectations equal true statistical ex-
pected values) gives a disproportionate faith in the market mechanism and
collective agent behavior so that, by a process similar to Adam Smith’s invis-
ible hand, the collective of agents by the sum of their actions, similar to the
action of a central limit theorem given an average converging with absolute
certainty to the mean with no ﬂuctuation in the large N limit, converge to
the right fundamental price with almost certainty. Thus, the observed price
is the right price and the fundamental price is only approximately estimated
because not all fundamentals are known with good precision. And here comes
the excess volatility puzzle.
In order to understand all the fuss made in the name of the excess volatil-
ity puzzle, we need to go back to the deﬁnition of value. According the ef-
ﬁcient market hypothesis (Fama, 1970; 1991; Samuelson, 1965; 1973), the
observed price p(t) of a share (or of a portfolio of shares representing an
index) equals the mathematical expectation, conditional on all information
available at the time, of the present value p∗(t) of actual subsequent divi-
dends accruing to that share (or portfolio of shares). This fundamental value
p∗(t) is not known at time t, and has to be forecasted. The key point is
that the eﬃcient market hypothesis holds that the observed price equals the
optimal forecast of it. Diﬀerent forms of the eﬃcient markets model diﬀer
for instance in their choice of the discount rate used in the present value, but
the general eﬃcient markets model can be written as
p(t) = Et[p∗(t)] ,
(2)
where Et refers to the mathematical expectation conditional on public infor-
mation available at time t. This equation asserts that any surprising move-
ment in the stock market must have at its origin some new information about
15


--- Page 16 ---
the fundamental value p∗(t). It follows from the eﬃcient markets model that
p∗(t) = p(t) + ǫ(t)
(3)
where ǫ(t) is a forecast error. The forecast error ǫ(t) must be uncorrelated
with any information variable available at time t, otherwise the forecast would
not be optimal; it would not be taking into account all information. Since
the price p(t) itself constitutes a piece of information at time t, p(t) and
ǫ(t) must be uncorrelated with each other. Since the variance of the sum of
two uncorrelated variables is the sum of their variances, it follows that the
variance of p∗(t) must equal the variance of p(t) plus the variance of ǫ(t).
Hence, since the variance of ǫ(t) cannot be negative, one obtains that the
variance of p∗(t) must be greater than or equal to that of p(t). This expresses
the fundamental principle of optimal forecasting, according to which the
forecast must be less variable than the variable forecasted.
Empirically, one observes that the volatility of the realized price p(t) is
much larger than the volatility of the fundamental price p∗(t), as estimated
from all the sources of ﬂuctuations of the variables entering in the deﬁnition
of p∗(t). This is the opposite of the prediction resulting from expression (3).
This disagreement between theoretical prediction and empirical observation
is then referred to as the “excess volatility puzzle”. This puzzle is consid-
ered by many ﬁnancial economists as perhaps the most important challenge
to the orthodoxy of eﬃcient markets of neo-classical economics and many
researchers have written on its supposed resolution.
To a physicist, this puzzle is essentially non-existent. Rather than (3), a
physicist would indeed have written expression (1), that is, the observed price
is an approximation of the fundamental price, up to an error of appreciation
of the market.
The diﬀerence between (3) and (1) is at the core of the
diﬀerence in the modeling strategies of economists, that can be called top-
down (or from rational expectations and eﬃcient markets), compared with
the bottom-up or microscopic approach of physicists. According to equation
(1), the fact that the volatility of p(t) is larger than that of the fundamental
price p∗(t) is not a problem; it simply expresses the existence of a large noise
component in the pricing mechanism.
Black (1985) himself introduced the notion of “noise traders”, embodying
the presence of traders who are less than fully rational and whose inﬂuence
can cause prices and risk levels to diverge from expected levels. Models built
on the analogy with the Ising model to capture social inﬂuences between in-
vestors are reviewed in the next section, which often provide explanations for
the excess volatility puzzle. Let us mention in particular our own candidate
in terms of the “noise-induced volatility” phenomenon (Harras et al., 2012).
16


--- Page 17 ---
4
The Ising model and ﬁnancial economics
4.1
Roots and sources
The Ising model, introduced initially as a mathematical model of ferro-
magnetism in statistical mechanics (Brush, 1967), is now part of the common
culture of physics, as the simplest representation of interacting elements with
a ﬁnite number of possible states. The model consists of a large number of
magnetic moments (or spins) connected by links within a graph, network
or grid. In the simplest version, the spins can only take two values (±1),
which represent the direction in which they point (up or down). Each spin
interacts with its direct neighbors, tending to align together in a common
direction, while the temperature tends to make the spin orientations random.
Due to the ﬁght between the ordering alignment interaction and the disor-
dering temperature, the Ising model exhibits a non-trivial phase transition
in systems at and above two dimensions. Beyond ferromagnetism, it has de-
veloped into diﬀerent generalized forms that ﬁnd interesting applications in
the physics of ill-condensed matter such as spin-glasses (Mezard et al., 1987)
and in neurobiology (Hopﬁeld, 1982).
There is also a long tradition of using the Ising model and its extensions
to represent social interactions and organization (Wiedlich, 1971; 1991; 2000;
Callen and Shapero, 1974; Montroll and Badger, 1974; Galam et al., 1982;
Orlean, 1995). Indeed, the analogy between magnetic polarization and opin-
ion polarization was presented in the early 1970s by Weidlich (1971), in the
framework of “Sociodynamics”, and later by Galam et al. (1982) in a mani-
festo for “Sociophysics”. In this decade, several eﬀorts towards a quantitative
sociology developed (Schelling, 1971; 1978; Granovetter, 1978; 1983), based
on models essentially undistinguishable from spin models.
A large set of economic models can be mapped onto various versions of
the Ising model to account for social inﬂuence in individual decisions (see
Phan et al. (2004) and references therein). The Ising model is indeed one of
the simplest models describing the competition between the ordering force of
imitation or contagion and the disordering impact of private information or
idiosyncratic noise, which leads already to the crucial concept of spontaneous
symmetry breaking and phase transitions (McCoy and Wu, 1973).
It is
therefore not surprising to see it appearing in one guise or another in models
of social imitation (Galam and Moscovici, 1991) and of opinion polarization
(Galam, 2004; Sousa et al., 2005; Stauﬀer, 2005; Weidlich and Huebner,
2008).
The dynamical updating rules of the Ising model can be shown to describe
the formation of decisions of boundedly rational agents (Roehner and Sor-
17


--- Page 18 ---
nette, 2000) or to result from optimizing agents whose utilities incorporate
a social component (Phan et al., 2004).
An illuminating way to justify the use in social systems of the Ising model
(and of its many generalizations) together with a statistical physics approach
(in terms of the Boltzmann factor) derives from discrete choice models. Dis-
crete choice models consider as elementary entities the decision makers who
have to select one choice among a set of alternatives (Train, 2003). For in-
stance, the choice can be to vote for one of the candidates, or to ﬁnd the right
mate, or to attend a university among several or to buy or sell a given ﬁnan-
cial asset. To develop the formalism of discrete choice models, the concept of
a random utility is introduced, which is used to derive the most prominent
discrete choice model, the Logit model, which has a strong resemblance with
Boltzmann statistics. The formulation of a binary choice model of socially
interacting agents then allows one to obtain exactly an Ising model, which
establishes a connection between studies on Ising-like systems in physics and
collective behavior of social decision makers.
4.2
Random utilities, Logit model and Boltzmann fac-
tor
In this section, our goal is to demonstrate the intimate link between
the economic approach of random utilities and the framework of statistical
physics, on which the treatment of the Ising model in particular relies.
Random Utility Models provide a standard framework for discrete choice
scenarios. The decision maker has to choose one alternative out of a set X
of N possible ones. For each alternative x ∈X, the decision maker obtains
the utility (or payoﬀ) U(x). The decision maker will choose the alternative
that maximizes his/her utility. However, neither an external observer nor
the decision maker herself may be fully cognizant of the exact form of the
utility function U(x). Indeed, U(x) may depend upon a number of attributes
and explanatory variables, the environment as well as emotions, which are
impossible to specify or measure exhaustively and precisely. This is captured
by writing
U(x) = V (x) + ǫ(x) ,
(4)
where ǫ(x) is the unknown part decorating the normative utility V (x). One
interpretation is that ǫ(x) can represent the component of the utility of a de-
cision maker that is unknown or hidden to an observer trying to rationalize
the choices made by the decision maker, as done in experiments interpreted
within the utility framework. Or ǫ(x) could also contain an intrinsic random
part of the decision unknown to the decision maker herself, rooted in her un-
18


--- Page 19 ---
conscious. As ǫ(x) is unknown to the researcher, it will be assumed random,
hence the name, random utility model.
The probability for the decision maker to choose x over all other alterna-
tives Y = X −{x} is then given by
P(x)
=
Prob (U(x) > U(y) , ∀y ∈Y )
=
Prob (V (x) −V (y) > ǫ(y) −ǫ(x) , ∀y ∈Y ) .
(5)
Holman and Marley (as cited in Luce and Suppes (1965)) showed that if
the unknown utility ǫ(x) is distributed according to the double exponential
distribution, also called the Gumbel distribution, which has a cumulative
distribution function (CDF) given by
FG(x) = e−e−(x−µ)/γ
(6)
with positive constants µ and γ, then P(x) deﬁned in expression (5) is given
by the logistic model, which obeys the axiom of independence from irrelevant
alternatives (Luce, 1959). This axiom, at the core of standard utility theory,
states that the probability of choosing one possibility against another from
a set of alternatives is not aﬀected by the addition or removal of other alter-
natives, leading to the name “independence from irrelevant alternatives”.
Mathematically, it can be expressed as follows. Suppose that X represents
the complete set of possible choices and consider S ⊂X, a subset of these
choices. If, for any element x ∈X, there is a ﬁnite probability pX(x) ∈]0; 1[
of being chosen, then Luce’s choice axiom is deﬁned as
pX(x) = pS(x) · pX(S) ,
(7)
where pX(S) is the probability of choosing any element in S from the set X.
Writing expression (7) for another element y ∈X and taking the ratios term
by term leads to
pS(x)
pS(y) = pX(x)
pX(y) ,
(8)
which is the mathematical expression of the axiom of independence from
irrelevant alternatives. The other direction was proven by McFadden (1974),
who showed that, if the probability satisﬁes the independence from irrelevant
alternatives condition, then the unknown utility ǫ(x) has to be distributed
according to the Gumbel distribution.
The derivation of the Logit model from expressions (5) and (6) is as
follows. In equation (5), P(x) is written
P(x)
=
Prob (V (x) −V (y) + ǫ(x) > ǫ(y) , ∀y ∈Y ) ,
=
Z +∞
−∞
 Y
y∈Y
e−e−(V (x)−V (y)+ǫ(x))/γ
!
fG(ǫ(x))dǫ(x) ,
(9)
19


--- Page 20 ---
where µ has been set to 0 with no loss of generality and fG(ǫ(x)) = 1
γe−x/γe−e−x/γ
is the probability density function (PDF) associated with the CDF (6). Per-
forming the change of variable u = e−ǫ(x)/γ, we have
P(x)
=
Z +∞
0
 Y
y∈Y
e−ue(V (x)−V (y))/γ
!
e−udu ,
=
Z +∞
0
e−u P
y∈Y e−(V (x)−V (y))/γe−udu ,
=
1
1 + e−V (x)/γ P
y∈Y eV (y)/γ .
(10)
Multiplying both numerator and denominator of the last expression (10) by
eV (x)/γ, keeping in mind that Y = X −x, the well known logit formulation
is recovered,
P(x) =
eV (x)/γ
P
y∈X eV (y)/γ ,
(11)
which fulﬁlls the condition of independence from irrelevant alternatives. Note
that the Logit probability (11) has the same form as the Boltzmann proba-
bility in statistical physics for a system to be found in a state of with energy
−V (x) at a given temperature γ.
4.3
Quantum decision theory
There is a growing realisation that even these above frameworks do not
account for the many fallacies and paradoxes plaguing standard decision theo-
ries (see for instance http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_fallacies).
A strand of literature has been developing since about 2006 that borrows the
concept of interference and entanglement used in quantum mechanics in order
to attempt to account for theses paradoxes (Busemeyer et al., 2006; Pothos
and Busemeyer, 2009). A recent monograph reviews the developments using
simple analogs of standard physical toy models, such as the two entangled
spins underlying the Einstein-Poldovsky-Rosen phenomenon (Busemeyer and
Bruza, 2012).
From our point of view, the problem however is that these proposed reme-
dies are always designed for the speciﬁc fallacy or paradox under considera-
tion and require a speciﬁc set-up that cannot be generalised. To address this,
Yukalov and Sornette (2008-2013) have proposed a general framework, which
extends the interpretation of an intrinsic random component in any decision
by stressing the importance of formulating the problem in terms of composite
prospects. The corresponding “quantum decision theory” (QDT) is based on
20


--- Page 21 ---
the mathematical theory of separable Hilbert spaces. We are not suggesting
that the brain operates according to the rule of quantum physics. It is just
that the mathematics of Hilbert spaces, used to formalized quantum mechan-
ics, provides the simplest generalization of the probability theory axiomatized
by Kolmogorov, which allows for entanglement. This mathematical structure
captures the eﬀect of superposition of composite prospects, including many
incorporated intentions, which allows one to describe a variety of interesting
fallacies and anomalies that have been reported to particularize the decision
making of real human beings. The theory characterizes entangled decision
making, non-commutativity of subsequent decisions, and intention interfer-
ence.
Two ideas form the basement of the QDT developed by Yukalov and Sor-
nette (2008-2013). First, our decision may be intrinsically probabilistic, i.e.,
when confronted with the same set of choices (and having forgotten), we may
choose diﬀerent alternatives. Second, the attraction to a given option (say
choosing where to vacation among the following locations: Paris, New York,
Roma, Hawaii or Corsica) will depend in signiﬁcant part on the presentation
of the other options, reﬂecting a genuine “entanglement” of the propositions.
The consideration of composite prospects using the mathematical theory of
separable Hilbert spaces provides a natural and general foundation to capture
these eﬀects. Yukalov and Sornette (2008-2013) demonstrated how the viola-
tion of the Savage’s sure-thing principle (disjunction eﬀect) can be explained
quantitatively as a result of the interference of intentions, when making deci-
sions under uncertainty. The sign and amplitude of the disjunction eﬀects in
experiments are accurately predicted using a theorem on interference alter-
nation, which connects aversion-to-uncertainty to the appearance of negative
interference terms suppressing the probability of actions. The conjunction
fallacy is also explained by the presence of the interference terms. A series
of experiments have been analysed and shown to be in excellent agreement
with a priori evaluation of interference eﬀects. The conjunction fallacy was
also shown to be a suﬃcient condition for the disjunction eﬀect and novel
experiments testing the combined interplay between the two eﬀects are sug-
gested.
Our approach is based on the von Neumann theory of quantum measure-
ments (von Neumann, 1955), but with an essential diﬀerence. In quantum
theory, measurements are done over passive systems, while in decision the-
ory, decisions are taken by active human beings. Each of the latter is char-
acterized by its own strategic state of mind, speciﬁc for the given decision
maker. Therefore, expectation values in quantum decision theory are deﬁned
with respect to the decision-maker strategic state. In contrast, in standard
measurement theory, expectation values are deﬁned through an arbitrary
21


--- Page 22 ---
orthonormal basis.
In order to give a feeling of how QDT works in practice, let us delineate
its scheme. We refer to the published papers (Yukalov and Sornette, 2008,
2009a,b,c; 2010a,b; 2011) for more in-depth presentations and preliminary
tests. The ﬁrst key idea of QDT is to consider the so-called prospects, which
are the targets of the decision maker. Let a set of prospects πj be given,
pertaining to a complete transitive lattice
L ≡{πj : j = 1, 2, . . . , NL} .
(12)
The aim of decision making is to ﬁnd out which of the prospects is the most
favorable.
There can exist two types of setups. One is when a number of agents,
say N, choose between the given prospects. Another type is when a single
decision maker takes decisions in a repetitive manner, for instance taking
decisions N times. These two cases are treated similarly.
To each prospect πj, we put into correspondence a vector |πj > in the
Hilbert space, M, called the mind space, and the prospect operator
ˆP(πj) ≡| πj ⟩⟨πj | .
QDT is a probabilistic theory, with the prospect probability deﬁned as the
average
p(πj) ≡⟨s | ˆP(πj) | s ⟩
over the strategic state |s > characterizing the decision maker.
Though some intermediate steps of the theory may look a bit compli-
cated, the ﬁnal results are rather simple and can be straightforwardly used
in practice. Thus, for the prospect probabilities, we get ﬁnally
p(πj) = f(πj) + q(πj) ,
(13)
whose set deﬁnes a probability measure on the prospect lattice L, such that
X
πj∈L
p(πj) = 1 ,
0 ≤p(πj) ≤1 .
(14)
The most favorable prospect corresponds to the largest of probabilities (13).
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq. (13) is the utility factor
deﬁned as
f(πj) ≡
U(πj)
P
j U(πj)
(15)
22


--- Page 23 ---
through the expected utility U(πj) of prospects. The utilities are calculated
in the standard way accepted in classical utility theory. By this deﬁnition
X
πj∈L
f(πj) = 1 ,
0 ≤f(πj) ≤1 .
The second term is an attraction factor that is a contextual object de-
scribing subconscious feelings, emotions, and biases, playing the role of hid-
den variables. Despite their contextuality, it is proved that the attraction
factors always satisfy the alternation property, such that the sum
X
πj∈L
q(πj) = 0
(−1 ≤q(πj) ≤1)
(16)
over the prospect lattice L be zero. In addition, the average absolute value
of the attraction factor is estimated by the quarter law
1
NL
X
πj∈L
| q(πj) | = 1
4 .
(17)
These properties (16) and (17) allow us to quantitatively deﬁne the prospect
probabilities (13).
The prospect π1 is more useful than π2, when f(π1) > f(π2). And π1
is more attractive than π2 , if q(π1) > q(π2). The comparison between the
attractiveness of prospects is done on the basis of the following criteria: more
certain gain, more uncertain loss, higher activity under certainty, and lower
activity under uncertainty and risk.
Finally, decision makers choose the preferable prospect, whose probability
(13) is the largest. Therefore, a prospect can be more useful, while being less
attractive, as a result of which the choice can be in favor of the less useful
prospect. For instance, the prospect π1 is preferable over π2 when
f(π1) −f(π2) > q(π2) −q(π1) .
(18)
This inequality illustrates the situation and explains the appearance of para-
doxes in classical decision making, while in QDT such paradoxes never arise.
The existence of the attraction factor is due to the choice under risk and
uncertainty. If the latter would be absent, we would return to the classical
decision theory, based on the maximization of expected utility.
Then we
would return to the variety of known paradoxes.
The comparison with experimental data is done as follows. Let Nj agents
of the total number N choose the prospect πj. Then the aggregate probability
of this prospect is given (for a large number of agents) by the frequency
pexp(πj) = Nj
N .
(19)
23


--- Page 24 ---
This experimental probability is to be compared with the theoretical prospect
probability (13), using the standard tools of statistical hypothesis testing. In
this way, QDT provides a practical scheme that can be applied to realistic
problems. The development of the scheme for its application to various kinds
of decision making in psychology, economics, and ﬁnance, including temporal
eﬀects, provides interesting challenges.
Recently, Yukalov and Sornette (2013a) have also been able to deﬁne
quantum probabilities of composite events, thus introducing for the ﬁrst time
a rigorous and coherent generalisation of the probability of joint events. This
problem is actually of high importance for the theory of quantum measure-
ments and for quantum decision theory that is a part of measurement theory.
Yukalov and Sornette (2013a) showed that Luders probability of consecutive
measurements is a transition probability between two quantum states and
that this probability cannot be treated as a quantum extension of the classi-
cal conditional probability. Similarly, the Wigner distribution was shown to
be a weighted transition probability that cannot be accepted as a quantum
extension of the classical joint probability. Yukalov and Sornette (2013a) sug-
gested the deﬁnition of quantum joint probabilities by introducing composite
events in multichannel measurements. Based on the notion of measurements
under uncertainty, they demonstrated that the necessary condition for mode
interference is the entanglement of the composite prospect together with the
entanglement of the composite statistical state. Examples of applications
include quantum games and systems with multimode states, such as atoms,
molecules, quantum dots, or trapped Bose-condensed atoms with several co-
herent modes (Yukalov et al., 2013).
4.4
Discrete choice with social interaction and Ising
model
Among the diﬀerent variables that inﬂuence the utility of the decision
maker, partial information, cultural norms as well as herding tend to push her
decision towards that of her acquaintances as well as that of the majority. Let
us show here how access to partial information and rational optimization of
her expected payoﬀleads to strategies described by the Ising model (Roehner
and Sornette, 2000).
Consider N traders in a social network, whose links represent the com-
munication channels between the traders. We denote N(i) the number of
traders directly connected to i in the network. The traders buy or sell one
asset at price p(t), which evolves as a function of time assumed to be discrete
with unit time step. In the simplest version of the model, each agent can
24


--- Page 25 ---
either buy or sell only one unit of the asset. This is quantiﬁed by the buy
state si = +1 or the sell state si = −1. Each agent can trade at time t−1 at
the price p(t −1) based on all previous information up to t −1. We assume
that the asset price variation is determined by the following equation
p(t) −p(t −1)
p(t −1)
= F
 PN
i=1 si(t −1)
N
!
+ σ η(t) ,
(20)
where σ is the price volatility per unit time and η(t) is a white Gaussian noise
with unit variance that represents for instance the impact resulting from the
ﬂow of exogenous economic news.
The ﬁrst term in the r.h.s. of (20) is the price impact function describ-
ing the possible imbalance between buyers and sellers. We assume that the
function F(x) is such that F(0) = 0 and is monotonically increasing with
its argument. Kyle (1985) derived his famous linear price impact function
F(x) = λx within a dynamic model of a market with a single risk neutral in-
sider, random noise traders, and competitive risk neutral market makers with
sequential auctions. Huberman and Stanzl (2004) later showed that, when
the price impact of trades is permanent and time-independent, only linear
price-impact functions rule out quasi-arbitrage, the availability of trades that
generate inﬁnite expected proﬁts. We note however that this normative lin-
ear price impact impact has been challenged by physicists. Farmer et al.
(2013) report empirically that market impact is a concave function of the
size of large trading orders. They rationalize this observation as resulting
from the algorithmic execution of splitting large orders into small pieces and
executing incrementally. The approximate square-root impact function has
been earlier rationalized by Zhang (1999) with the argument that the time
needed to complete a trade of size L is proportional to L and that the unob-
servable price ﬂuctuations obey a diﬀusion process during that time. Toth
et al. (2011) propose that the concave market impact function reﬂects the
fact that markets operate in a critical regime where liquidity vanishes at the
current price, in the sense that all buy orders at price less than current prices
have been satisﬁed, and all sell orders at prices larger than the current price
have also been satisﬁed.
The studies (Bouchaud et al., 2009; Bouchaud,
2010), which distinguish between temporary and permanent components of
market impact, show important links between impact function, the distri-
bution of order sizes, optimization of strategies and dynamical equilibrium.
Kyle (private communication, 2012) and Gatheral and Schied (2013) point
out that the issue is far from resolved due to price manipulation, dark pools,
predatory trading and no well-behaved optimal order execution strategy.
Returning to the implication of expression (20), at time t −1, just when
25


--- Page 26 ---
the price p(t−1) has been announced, the trader i deﬁnes her strategy si(t−1)
that she will hold from t−1 to t, thus realizing the proﬁt (p(t)−p(t−1))si(t−
1). To deﬁne si(t −1), the trader calculates her expected proﬁt E[P&L],
given the past information and her position, and then chooses si(t −1) such
that E[P&L] is maximal. Within the rational expectation model, all traders
have full knowledge of the fundamental equation (20) of their ﬁnancial world.
However, they cannot poll the positions {sj} that all other traders will take,
which will determine the price drift according to expression (20). The next
best thing that trader i can do is to poll her N(i) “neighbors” and construct
her prediction for the price drift from this information. The trader needs
an additional information, namely the a priori probability P+ and P−for
each trader to buy or sell. The probabilities P+ and P−are the only pieces
of information that she can use for all the traders that she does not poll
directly. From this, she can form her expectation of the price change. The
simplest case corresponds to a neutral market where P+ = P−= 1/2. To
allow for a simple discussion, we restrict the discussion to the linear impact
function F(x) = λx. The trader i thus expects the following price change
λ
 P∗N(i)
j=1
sj(t −1)
N
!
+ σ ˆηi(t) ,
(21)
where the index j runs over the neighborhood of agent i and ˆηi(t) represents
the idiosyncratic perception of the economic news as interpreted by agent
i.
Notice that the sum is now restricted to the N(i) neighbors of trader
i because the sum over all other traders, whom she cannot poll directly,
averages out. This restricted sum is represented by the star symbol. Her
expected proﬁt is thus
E[P&L] =
 
λ
 P∗N(i)
j=1
sj(t −1)
N
!
+ σ ˆηi(t)
!
p(t −1) si(t −1) .
(22)
The strategy that maximizes her proﬁt is
si(t −1) = sign

λ
N
N(i)∗
X
j=1
sj(t −1) + σ ˆηi(t)

.
(23)
Equation (23) is nothing but the kinetic Ising model with Glauber dynamics
if the random innovations ˆηi(t) are distributed with a Logistic distribution
(see demonstration in the Appendix of (Harras et al., 2012)).
This evolution equation (23) belongs to the class of stochastic dynamical
models of interacting particles (Liggett, 1995; 1997), which have been much
26


--- Page 27 ---
studied mathematically in the context of physics and biology. In this model
(23), the tendency towards imitation is governed by λ/N, which is called the
coupling strength; the tendency towards idiosyncratic behavior is governed
by σ. Thus the value of λ/N relative to σ determines the outcome of the
battle between order (imitation process) and disorder, and the development
of collective behavior. More generally, expression (23) provides a convenient
formulation to model imitation, contagion and herding and many generaliza-
tions have been studied that we now brieﬂy review.
5
Generalized kinetic Ising model for ﬁnan-
cial economics
The previous section motivates the notion that the Ising model provides
a natural framework to study the collective behaviour of interacting agents.
Many generalisations have been introduced in the literature and we provide
a brief survey here.
The existence of an underlying Ising phase transition, together with the
mechanism of “sweeping of an instability” (Sornette, 1994; Stauﬀer and Sor-
nette, 1999; Sornette et al., 2002), was found to lead to the emergence of
collective imitation that translate into the formation of transient bubbles,
followed by crashes (Kaizoji et al., 2002).
Bouchaud and Cont (1998) presented a nonlinear Langevin equation of
the dynamics of a stock price resulting from the unbalance between supply
and demand, themselves based on two opposite opinions (sell and buy). By
taking into account the feedback eﬀects of price variations onto themselves,
they ﬁnd a formulation analogous to an inertial particle in a quartic potential
as in the mean-ﬁeld theory of phase transitions.
Brock and Durlauf (1999) constructed a stylized model of community
theory choice based on agents’ utilities that contains a term quantifying the
degree of homophily which, in a context of random utilities, lead to a for-
malism essentially identical to the mean ﬁeld theory of magnetism. They
ﬁnd that periods of extended disagreement alternate with periods of rapid
consensus formation, as a result of choices that are made based on compar-
isons between pairs of alternatives. Brock and Durlauf (2001) further extend
their model of aggregate behavioral outcomes, in the presence of individual
utilities that exhibits social interaction eﬀects, to the case of generalized lo-
gistic models of individual choice that incorporate terms reﬂecting the desire
of individuals to conform to the behavior of others in an environment of non-
cooperative decision making. A multiplicity of equilibria is found when the
27


--- Page 28 ---
social interactions exceed a particular threshold and decision making is non-
cooperative. As expected from the neighborhood of phase changes, a large
susceptibility translates into the observation that small changes in private
utility lead to large equilibrium changes in average behavior. The originality
of Brock and Durlauf (2001) is to be able to introduce heterogeneity and
uncertainty into the microeconomic speciﬁcation of decision making, as well
as to derive an implementable likelihood function that allows one to calibrate
the agent-based model onto empirical data.
Kaizoji (2000) used an inﬁnite-range Ising model to embody the tendency
of traders to be inﬂuenced by the investment attitude of other traders, which
gives rise to regimes of bubbles and crashes interpreted as due to the collec-
tive behavior of the agents at the Ising phase transition and in the ordered
phase. Biased agent’s idiosyncratic preference corresponds to the existence
of an eﬀective “magnetic ﬁeld” in the language of physics. Because the so-
cial interactions compete with the biased preference, a ﬁrst-order transition
exists, which is associated with the existence of crashes.
Bornholdt (2001) studied a simple spin model in which traders interact at
diﬀerent scales with interactions that can be of opposite signs, thus leading
to “frustration”, and traders are also related to each other via their aggre-
gate impact on the price. The frustration causes metastable dynamics with
intermittency and phases of chaotic dynamics, including phases reminiscent
of ﬁnancial bubbles and crashes. While the model exhibits phase transitions,
the dynamics deemed relevant to ﬁnancial markets is sub-critical.
Krawiecki et al.
(2002) used an Ising model with stochastic coupling
coeﬃcients, which leads to volatility clustering and a power law distribution
of returns at a single ﬁxed time scale.
Michard and Bouchaud (2005) have used the framework of the Random
Field Ising Model, interpreted as a threshold model for collective decisions
accounting both for agent heterogeneity and social imitation, to describe
imitation and social pressure found in data from three diﬀerent sources: birth
rates, sales of cell phones and the drop of applause in concert halls.
Nadal et al. (2005) developed a simple market model with binary choices
and social inﬂuence (called “positive externality” in economics), where the
heterogeneity is either of the type represented by the Ising model at ﬁnite
temperature (known as annealed disorder) in a uniform external ﬁeld (the
random utility models of Thurstone) or is ﬁxed and corresponds to a a par-
ticular case of the quenched disorder model known as a random ﬁeld Ising
model, at zero temperature (called the McFadden and Manski model). A
novel ﬁrst-order transition between a high price and a small number of buy-
ers, to another one with a low price and a large number of buyers, arises
when the social inﬂuence is strong enough. Gordon et al. (2009) further
28


--- Page 29 ---
extend this model to the case of socially interacting individuals that make
a binary choice in a context of positive additive endogenous externalities.
Speciﬁcally, the diﬀerent possible equilibria depend on the distribution of id-
iosyncratic preferences, called here Idiosyncratic Willingnesses to Pay (IWP)
and there are regimes where several equilibria coexist, associated with non-
monotonous demand function as a function of price. This model is again
strongly reminiscent of the random ﬁeld Ising model studied in the physics
literature.
Grabowski and Kosinski (2006) modeled the process of opinion forma-
tion in the human population on a scale-free network, taking into account
a hierarchical, two-level structures of interpersonal interactions, as well as a
spatial localization of individuals. With Ising-like interactions together with
a coupling with a mass media “ﬁeld”, they observed several transitions and
limit cycles, with non-standard “freezing of opinions by heating” and the re-
building of the opinions in the population by the inﬂuence of the mass media
at large annealed disorder levels (large temperature).
Sornette and Zhou (2006a) and Zhou and Sornette (2007) generalized a
stochastic dynamical formulation of the Ising model (Roehner and Sornette,
2000) to account for the fact that the imitation strength between agents may
evolve in time with a memory of how past news have explained realized mar-
ket returns. By comparing two versions of the model, which diﬀer on how
the agents interpret the predictive power of news, they show that the stylized
facts of ﬁnancial markets are reproduced only when agents are overconﬁdent
and mis-attribute the success of news to predict return to the existence of
herding eﬀects, thereby providing positive feedbacks leading to the model
functioning close to the critical point. Other stylized facts, such as a multi-
fractal structure characterized by a continuous spectrum of exponents of the
power law relaxation of endogenous bursts of volatility, are well reproduced
by this model of adaptation and learning of the imitation strength. Harras
et al. (2012) examined a diﬀerent version of the Sornette-Zhou (2006a) for-
mulation to study the inﬂuence of a rapidly varying external signal to the
Ising collective dynamics for intermediate noise levels. They discovered the
phenomenon of “noise-induced volatility”, characterized by an increase of
the level of ﬂuctuations in the collective dynamics of bistable units in the
presence of a rapidly varying external signal. Paradoxically, and diﬀerent
from “stochastic resonance”, the response of the system becomes uncorre-
lated with the external driving force. Noise-induced volatility was proposed
to be a possible cause of the excess volatility in ﬁnancial markets, of en-
hanced eﬀective temperatures in a variety of out-of-equilibrium systems, and
of strong selective responses of immune systems of complex biological organ-
isms. Noise-induced volatility is robust to the existence of various network
29


--- Page 30 ---
topologies.
Horvath and Kuscsik (2007) considered a network with reconnection dy-
namics, with nodes representing decision makers modeled as (“intra-net”)
neural spin network with local and global inputs and feedback connections.
The coupling between the spin dynamics and the network rewiring produces
several of the stylized facts of standard ﬁnancial markets, including the Zipf
law for wealth.
Biely et al. (2009) introduced an Ising model in which spins are dynam-
ically coupled by links in a dynamical network in order to represent agents
who are free to choose their interaction partners.
Assuming that agents
(spins) strive to minimize an “energy”, the spins as well as the adjacency
matrix elements organize together, leading to an exactly soluble model with
reduced complexity compared with the standard ﬁxed links Ising model.
Motivated by market dynamics, Vikram and Sinha (2011) extend the Ising
model by assuming that the interaction dynamics between individual com-
ponents is mediated by a global variable making the mean-ﬁeld description
exact.
Harras and Sornette (2011) studied a simple agent-based model of bub-
bles and crashes to clarify how their proximate triggering factor relate to
their fundamental mechanism. Taking into account three sources of informa-
tion, (i) public information, i.e. news, (ii) information from their “friendship”
network and (iii) private information, the boundedly rational agents continu-
ously adapt their trading strategy to the current market regime by weighting
each of these sources of information in their trading decision according to
its recent predicting performance. In this set-up, bubbles are found to origi-
nate from a random lucky streak of positive news, which, due to a feedback
mechanism of these news on the agents’ strategies develop into a transient
collective herding regime. Paradoxically, it is the attempt for investors to
adapt to the current market regime that leads to a dramatic ampliﬁcation
of the price volatility. A positive feedback loop is created by the two dom-
inating mechanisms (adaptation and imitation), which, by reinforcing each
other, result in bubbles and crashes. The model oﬀers a simple reconciliation
of the two opposite (herding versus fundamental) proposals for the origin of
crashes within a single framework and justiﬁes the existence of two popu-
lations in the distribution of returns, exemplifying the concept that crashes
are qualitatively diﬀerent from the rest of the price moves (Johansen and
Sornette, 1998; 2001/2002; Sornette, 2009; Sornette and Ouillon, 2012).
Inspired by the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and its consequences on
the global ﬁnancial system, Sieczka et al. (2011) developed a simple model
in which the credit rating grades of banks in a network of interdependen-
cies follow a kind of Ising dynamics of co-evolution with the credit ratings
30


--- Page 31 ---
of the other ﬁrms. The dynamics resembles the evolution of a Potts spin
glass with the external global ﬁeld corresponding to a panic eﬀect in the
economy. They ﬁnd a global phase transition, between paramagnetic and
ferromagnetic phases, which explains the large susceptibility of the system
to negative shocks. This captures the impact of the Lehman default event,
quantiﬁed as having an almost immediate eﬀect in worsening the credit wor-
thiness of all ﬁnancial institutions in the economic network. The model is
amenable to testing diﬀerent policies. For instance, bailing out the ﬁrst few
defaulting ﬁrms does not solve the problem, but does have the eﬀect of al-
leviating considerably the global shock, as measured by the fraction of ﬁrms
that are not defaulting as a consequence.
Kostanjcar and Jeren (2013) deﬁned a generalized Ising model of ﬁnancial
markets with a kind of minority-game payoﬀstructure and strategies that
depend on order sizes. Because their agents focus on the change of their
wealth, they ﬁnd that the macroscopic dynamics of the aggregated set of
orders (reﬂected into the market returns) remains stochastic even in the
thermodynamic limit of a very large number of agents.
Bouchaud (2013) proposed a general strategy for modeling collective
socio-economic phenomena with the Random Field Ising model (RFIM) and
variants, which is argued to provide a unifying framework to account for
the existence of sudden ruptures and crises. The variants of the RFIM cap-
ture destabilizing self-referential feedback loops, induced either by herding
or trending. An interesting insight is the determination of conditions under
which Adam Smith’s invisible hand can fail badly at solving simple coor-
dination problems. Moreover, Bouchaud (2013) stresses that most of these
models assume explicitly or implicitly the validity of the so-called “detailed-
balance” in decision rules, which is not a priori necessary to describe real
decision-making processes.
The question of the robustness of the results
obtained when detailed balance holds to models where it does not remain
largely open. Examples from physics suggest that much richer behaviors can
emerge.
Kaizoji et al. (2013) introduced a model of ﬁnancial bubbles with two
assets (risky and risk-free), in which rational investors and noise traders co-
exist. Rational investors form expectations on the return and risk of a risky
asset and maximize their expected utility with respect to their allocation on
the risky asset versus the risk-free asset. Noise traders are subjected to social
imitation (Ising like interactions) and follow momentum trading (leading to a
kind of time-varying magnetic ﬁeld). Allowing for random time-varying herd-
ing propensity as in (Sornette, 1994; Stauﬀer and Sornette, 1999; Sornette
et al., 2002), this model reproduces the most important stylized facts of ﬁ-
nancial markets such as a fat-tail distribution of returns, volatility clustering
31


--- Page 32 ---
as well as transient faster-than-exponential bubble growth with approximate
log-periodic behavior (Sornette, 1998b; 2003). The model accounts well for
the behavior of traders and for the price dynamics that developed during the
dotcom bubble in 1995-2000. Momentum strategies are shown to be tran-
siently proﬁtable, supporting these strategies as enhancing herding behavior.
6
Ising-like imitation of noise traders and mod-
els of ﬁnancial bubbles and crashes
6.1
Phenomenology of ﬁnancial bubbles and crashes
Stock market crashes are momentous ﬁnancial events that are fascinating
to academics and practitioners alike. According to the standard academic
textbook world view that markets are eﬃcient, only the revelation of a dra-
matic piece of information can cause a crash, yet in reality even the most
thorough post-mortem analyses are, for most large losses, inconclusive as to
what this piece of information might have been. For traders and investors,
the fear of a crash is a perpetual source of stress, and the onset of the event
itself always ruins the lives of some of them. Most approaches to explain
crashes search for possible mechanisms or eﬀects that operate at very short
time scales (hours, days or weeks at most). Other researchers have suggested
market crashes may have endogenous origins.
In a culmination of almost 20 years of research in ﬁnancial economics, we
have challenged the standard economic view that stock markets are both eﬃ-
cient and unpredictable. We propose that the main concepts that are needed
to understand stock markets are imitation, herding, self-organized cooper-
ativity and positive feedbacks, leading to the development of endogenous
instabilities. According to this theory, local eﬀects such as interest raises,
new tax laws, new regulations and so on, invoked as the cause of the burst of
a given bubble leading to a crash, are only one of the triggering factors but
not the fundamental cause of the bubble collapse. We propose that the true
origin of a bubble and of its collapse lies in the unsustainable pace of stock
market price growth based on self-reinforcing over-optimistic anticipation.
As a speculative bubble develops, it becomes more and more unstable and
very susceptible to any disturbance.
In a given ﬁnancial bubble, it is the expectation of future earnings rather
than present economic reality that motivates the average investor. History
provides many examples of bubbles driven by unrealistic expectations of fu-
ture earnings followed by crashes.
The same basic ingredients are found
repeatedly. Markets go through a series of stages, beginning with a market
32


--- Page 33 ---
or sector that is successful, with strong fundamentals. Credit expands, and
money ﬂows more easily. (Near the peak of Japan’s bubble in 1990, Japan’s
banks were lending money for real estate purchases at more than the value
of the property, expecting the value to rise quickly.) As more money is avail-
able, prices rise. More investors are drawn in, and expectations for quick
proﬁts rise. The bubble expands, and then ﬁnally has to burst. In other
words, fuelled by initially well-founded economic fundamentals, investors de-
velop a self-fulﬁlling enthusiasm by an imitative process or crowd behavior
that leads to the building of castles in the air, to paraphrase Malkiel (2012).
Furthermore, the causes of the crashes on the US markets in 1929, 1987,
1998 and in 2000 belong to the same category, the diﬀerence being mainly
in which sector the bubble was created: in 1929, it was utilities; in 1987, the
bubble was supported by a general deregulation of the market with many
new private investors entering it with very high expectations with respect to
the proﬁt they would make; in 1998, it was an enormous expectation with
respect to the investment opportunities in Russia that collapsed; before 2000,
it was extremely high expectations with respect to the Internet, telecommu-
nications, and so on, that fuelled the bubble. In 1929, 1987 and 2000, the
concept of a “new economy” was each time promoted as the rational origin
of the upsurge of the prices.
Several previous works in economics have suggested that bubbles and
crashes have endogenous origins, as we explain below. For instance, Irving
Fisher (1933) and Hyman Minsky (1992) both suggested that endogenous
feedback eﬀects lead to ﬁnancial instabilities, although their analysis did
not include formal models.
Robert Shiller (2006) has been spearheading
the notion that markets, at times, exhibit “irrational exuberance”. While
the eﬃcient market hypothesis provides a useful ﬁrst-order representation of
ﬁnancial markets in normal times, one can observe regimes where the an-
chor of a fundamental price is shaky and large uncertainties characterize the
future gains, which provides a fertile environment for the occurrence of bub-
bles. When a number of additional elements are present, markets go through
transient phases where they disconnect in speciﬁc dangerous ways from this
fuzzy concept of fundamental value. These are regimes where investors are
herding, following the ﬂock and pushing the price up along an unsustainable
growth trajectory. Many other mechanisms have been studied to explain the
occurrence of ﬁnancial bubbles, such as constraints on short selling and lack
of synchronisation of arbitrageurs due to heterogeneous beliefs on the exis-
tence of a bubble, see Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2012) and Xiong (2013)
for two excellent reviews.
33


--- Page 34 ---
6.2
The critical point analogy
Mathematically, we propose that large stock market crashes are the so-
cial analogues of so-called critical points studied in the statistical physics
community in relation to magnetism, melting, and other phase transforma-
tion of solids, liquids, gas and other phases of matter (Sornette, 2000). This
theory is based on the existence of a cooperative behavior of traders imi-
tating each other which leads to progressively increasing build-up of market
cooperativity, or eﬀective interactions between investors, often translated
into accelerating ascent of the market price over months and years before
the crash. According to this theory, a crash occurs because the market has
entered an unstable phase and any small disturbance or process may have
triggered the instability. Think of a ruler held up vertically on your ﬁnger:
this very unstable position will lead eventually to its collapse, as a result of a
small (or absence of adequate) motion of your hand or due to any tiny whiﬀ
of air. The collapse is fundamentally due to the unstable position; the in-
stantaneous cause of the collapse is secondary. In the same vein, the growth
of the sensitivity and the growing instability of the market close to such a
critical point might explain why attempts to unravel the local origin of the
crash have been so diverse. Essentially, anything would work once the system
is ripe. In this view, a crash has fundamentally an endogenous or internal
origin and exogenous or external shocks only serve as triggering factors.
As a consequence, the origin of crashes is much more subtle than often
thought, as it is constructed progressively by the market as a whole, as a self-
organizing process. In this sense, the true cause of a crash could be termed a
systemic instability. This leads to the possibility that the market anticipates
the crash in a subtle self-organized and cooperative fashion, hence releas-
ing precursory “ﬁngerprints” observable in the stock market prices (Sornette
and Johansen, 2001; Sornette, 2003). These ﬁngerprints have been modeled
by log-periodic power laws (LPPL) (Johansen et al., 1999; 2000), which are
beautiful mathematical patterns associated with the mathematical general-
ization of the notion of fractals to complex imaginary dimensions (Sornette,
1998).
In the framework of Johansen, Ledoit and Sornette (1999; 2000),
an Ising-like stochastic dynamics is used to describe the time evolution of
imitation between noise traders, which controls the dynamics of the crash
hazard rate (see Sornette et al. (2013) for a recent update on the status of
the model).
Our theory of collective behaviour predicts robust signatures of specula-
tive phases of ﬁnancial markets, both in accelerating bubbles and decreasing
prices (see below).
These precursory patterns have been documented for
essentially all crashes on developed as well as emergent stock markets. Ac-
34


--- Page 35 ---
cordingly, the crash of October 1987 is not unique but a representative of
an important class of market behaviour, underlying also the crash of Octo-
ber 1929 (Galbraith, 1997) and many others (Kindleberger, 2000; Sornette,
2003).
We refer to the book (Sornette, 2003) for a detailed description and the
review of many empirical tests and of several forward predictions. In partic-
ular, we predicted in January 1999 that Japan’s Nikkei index would rise 50
percent by the end of that year, at a time when other economic forecasters
expected the Nikkei to continue to fall, and when Japan’s economic indica-
tors were declining. The Nikkei rose more than 49 percent during that time.
We also successfully predicted several short-term changes of trends in the US
market and in the Nikkei and we have diagnosed ex-ante several other major
bubbles (see e.g. (Jiang et al., 2010) and references therein).
6.3
Tests with the ﬁnancial crisis observatory
In 2008, we created the Financial Crisis Observatory (FCO: http://www.er.ethz.ch/fco)
as a scientiﬁc platform that aimed at testing and quantifying rigorously, in
a systematic way and on a large scale the hypothesis that ﬁnancial markets
exhibit a degree of ineﬃciency and a potential for predictability, especially
during regimes when bubbles develop. Because back-testing is subjected to a
host of possible biases, in November 2009, the Financial Bubble Experiment
(FBE) was launched within the FCO at ETH Zurich. Our motivation is to
develop real-time advanced forecast methodology that is constructed to be
free, as much as possible, of all possible biases plaguing previous tests of
bubbles.
In particular, active researchers are constantly tweaking their procedures,
so that predicted ‘events’ become moving targets. Only advanced forecasts
can be free of data-snooping and other statistical biases of ex-post tests. The
FBE aims at rigorously testing bubble predictability using methods devel-
oped in our group and by other scholars over the last decade. The main
concepts and techniques used for the FBE have been documented in numer-
ous papers (Jiang et al., 2009; Johansen et al., 1999; Johansen and Sornette,
2006; Sornette and Johansen, 2001; Sornette and Zhou, 2006b) and the book
(Sornette, 2003). In the FBE, we developed a new method of delivering our
forecasts where the results are revealed only after the predicted event has
passed but where the original date when we produced these same results
can be publicly, digitally authenticated (see the reports and ex-post anal-
ysis of our diagnostics performed ex-ante at http://www.er.ethz.ch/fco and
resources therein).
Stock market crashes are often unforeseen by most people, especially
35


--- Page 36 ---
economists. One reason why predicting complex systems is diﬃcult is that we
have to look at the forest rather than the trees, and almost nobody does that.
Our approach tries to avoid this trap. From the tulip mania, where tulips
worth tens of thousands of dollars in present U.S. dollars became worthless
a few months later, to the U.S. bubble in 2000, the same patterns occur over
the centuries. Today we have electronic commerce, but fear and greed remain
the same. Humans remain endowed with basically the same qualities (fear,
greed, hope, lust) today as they were in the 17th century.
6.4
The social bubble hypothesis
Bubbles and crashes are ubiquitous to human activity: we as humans
are rarely satisﬁed with the Status Quo; we tend to be over-optimistic with
respect to future prospects and, as social animals, we herd to ﬁnd comfort in
being (right or wrong) with the crowd. This leads to human activities being
punctuated by bubbles and their corrections. The bubbles may come as a
result of expectations of the future returns from new technology, such as in
the exploration of the solar system, of the human biology or new computer
and information technologies. I contend that this trait allows us as a species
to take risks to innovate with extraordinary successes that would not arise
otherwise.
Bubbles deﬁned as collective over-enthusiasm seem a necessary (and un-
avoidable) process to foster our collective attitude towards risk taking, break-
ing the stalemate of society resulting from its tendency towards strong risk
avoidance (Sornette, 2008). An absence of bubble psychology would lead
to stagnation and conservatism as no large risks are taken and, as a con-
sequence, no large return can be accrued. We have coined the term ‘social
bubble’ in order to show how to take advantage of the bubble process to
catalyze long-term investment (Sornette, 2008; Gisler and Sornette, 2009;
2010; Gisler et al., 2011). A similar conclusion has been reached by William
Janeway (2012), an American venture capital investor for more than 40 years.
His book provides an accessible pathway to appreciate the dynamics of the
innovation economy. In his understanding, informed by both practice and
theory, the innovation economy begins with discovery and culminates in spec-
ulation, with continuous positive feedbacks loops between them. Over some
250 years, so his argument goes, economic growth has been driven by suc-
cessive processes of trial and error: upstream explorations in research and
inventions and downstream experiments in exploiting the new economic space
opened by innovation.
In a nutshell, the “social bubble hypothesis” claims that strong social
interactions between enthusiastic supporters weave a network of reinforcing
36


--- Page 37 ---
feedbacks that lead to widespread endorsement and extraordinary commit-
ment by those involved, beyond what would be rationalized by a standard
cost-beneﬁt analysis. It does not cast any value system however, notwith-
standing the use of the term “bubble”.
Rather it identiﬁes the types of
dynamics that shape scientiﬁc or technological endeavors. In other words,
we suggest that major projects often proceed via a social bubble mechanism
(Sornette, 2008; Gisler and Sornette, 2009; 2010; Gisler et al., 2011; 2013).
Thus, bubbles and crashes, the hallmark of humans, are perhaps our
most constructive collective process. But they may also undermine our quest
for stability.
We thus have to be prepared and adapted to the systemic
instabilities that are part of us, part of our collective organization, ... and
which will no doubt recur again perhaps with even more violent eﬀects in
the coming decade.
7
Agent-based models (ABMs) in economics
and ﬁnance
Our review would be incomplete if not covering the very dynamical ﬁeld of
agent based models (ABMs), also known as computational economic models.
They provide an alternative to the econometric and dynamical stochastic
general equilibrium (DSGE) approaches used by central banks for instance.
They use computer simulated interactions between agents (decision-makers)
(Farmer and Foley, 2009). The Ising-type models discussed in the preceding
sections can be considered as special ABM implementations.
ABMs also illustrate vividly the special relations between economics and
physics. Consider Schelling (1971; 1978)’s work that demonstrated how slight
diﬀerences of micro motives among heterogenous agents lead to impressive
macro behaviours. Schelling wanted to falsify the standard view about seg-
regations between black and white communities in the US, which assumed
strong diﬀerences in preferences in order to explain the observed concen-
trations. Using manually implemented ABMs on a check board, he showed
that tiny variations in tastes are suﬃcient to lead to macroscopic segregation
when allowing the system to evolve over suﬃciently long times. Small micro-
eﬀects lead to large macro-consequences. This discovery was a breakthrough
in the social sciences and changed the perspective on community segrega-
tion. To the physicist trained in the ﬁeld of phase transitions and statistical
physics, this result is pretty obvious: tiny diﬀerences in the interactions be-
tween pairs of molecules (oil-oil, water-water and oil-water) are well-known
to renormalise into macroscopic demixing. This is a beautiful example of the
37


--- Page 38 ---
impact of repeated interactions leading to large-scale collective patterns. In
the physicist language, in addition to energy, entropy is an important and
often leading contribution to large scale pattern formation, and this under-
standing requires the typical statistical physics training that economists and
social scientists often lack.
7.1
A taste of ABMs
Agent-based models have the advantage of facilitating interdisciplinary
collaboration and reveal unity across disciplines (Axelrod, 2005; Parisi et
al., 2013). The possibilities of such models are a priori almost endless, only
limited by the available computational power as well as the insights of the
modeller. One can simulate very large number of diﬀerent agents acting (up
to tens of millions of agents as for instance in www.matsim.org, see (Meister
et al., 2010) and other references at this url). Diﬀerent decision making rules
can be implemented, including utility maximization or behavioral decision
making. For example, one can have diﬀerent agents to model consumers,
policy-makers, traders or institutions where each type follows possibly dis-
tinct agendas and obeys diﬀerent decision making rules. Such a simulation
is performed in discrete time steps where, at every time step, each actor has
to take a decision (e.g. buying, selling or staying out of a stock on the ﬁnan-
cial market) based on her behavioral rules. Phenomena such as bubbles and
subsequent crashes have been found to emerge rather naturally from such
ABMs as a consequence of the existence of general interaction eﬀects among
heterogeneous agents. These interactions range from social herding, rational
imitation to information cascades (Bikhchandani et al., 1992).
To study large-scale phenomena arising from micro-interactions, ABMs
have already found numerous applications in the past (Bonabeau, 2002;
MacKinzie, 2002).
Early ABM developed for social science applications
include F¨ollmer (1974)’s mathematical treatment of Ising economies with
no stabilization for strong agent interactions, Schelling (1978)s segregation
model, Weidlich (1991)’s synergetic approach, Kirman (1991, 1993)’s ant
model of recruitment and so on.
The Santa Fe Institute Artiﬁcial Stock Market is one of the pioneering
ABMs, which was created by a group of economists and computer scientists
at the Santa Fe Institute in New Mexico (Arthur et al., 1997; LeBaron et al,
1999; Palmer et al., 1994; 1999). The key motivation was to test whether
artiﬁcially intelligent agents would converge to the homogeneous rational
expectations equilibrium or not. To the surprise of the creators, the artiﬁ-
cial stock markets failed to show convergence to the expected equilibrium,
but rather underlined the importance of co-evolution of trading strategies
38


--- Page 39 ---
adopted by the synthetic agents together with the aggregate market behav-
ior. However, the Santa Fe Institute Artiﬁcial Stock Market has been shown
to suﬀer from a number of defects, for instance the fact that the rate of ap-
pearance of new trading strategies is too fast to be realistic. Only recently
was it also realized that previous interpretations neglecting the emergence of
technical trading rules should be corrected (Ehrentreich, 2008).
Inspired by the El-Farol Bar problem (Arthur, 1994b) meant to emphasize
how inductive reasoning together with a minority payoﬀprevents agents to
converge to an equilibrium and force them to continuously readjust their ex-
pectation, the Minority Game was introduced by Challet and Zhang (1997;
1998) to model prices in markets as reﬂecting competition among a ﬁnite
number of agents for a scarce resource (Marsili et al., 2000). Extensions in-
clude the Majority Game and the Dollar Game (a time delayed version of
the majority game) and delayed version of the minority games. In minority
games, which are part of ﬁrst-entry games, no strategy can remain persis-
tently a winner; otherwise it will be progressively adopted by a growing
number of agents, bringing its demise by construction of the minority payoﬀ.
This leads to the phenomenon of frustration and anti-persistence. Satinover
and Sornette (2007a,b; 2009) have shown that optimizing agents are actually
underperforming random agents, thus embodying the general notion of the
illusion of control. It can be shown more generally that learning and adaptive
agents will converge to the best dominating strategy, which turns out to be
the random choice strategy for minority or ﬁrst-entry payoﬀs.
Evstigneev et al. (2009) review results obtained on evolutionary ﬁnance,
namely the ﬁeld studying the dynamic interaction of investment strategies in
ﬁnancial markets through ABM implementing Darwinian ideas and random
dynamical system theory. By studying the wealth distribution among agents
over the long-term, Evstigneev et al. are able to determine the type of strate-
gies that over-perform in the long term. They ﬁnd that such strategies are
essentially derived from Kelly (1956)’s criterion of optimizing the expected
log-return. They also pave the road for the development of a generalization of
continuous-time ﬁnance with evolutionary and game theoretical components.
Darley and Outkin (2007) describe the development of a Nasdaq ABM
market simulation, developed during the collaboration between the Bios
Group (a spin-oﬀof the Santa Fe Institute) and Nasdaq Company to explore
new ways to better understand Nasdaq’s operating world. The artiﬁcial mar-
ket has opened the possibility to explore the impact of market microstructure
and market rules on the behavior of market makers and traders. One ob-
tained insight is that decreasing the tick size to very small values may hinder
the market’s ability to perform its price discovery process, while at the same
time the total volume traded can greatly increase with no apparent beneﬁts
39


--- Page 40 ---
(and perhaps direct harm) to the investors’ average wealth.
In a similar spirit of using ABM for an understanding of real-life economic
developments, Geanakoplos et al.
(2012) have developed an agent based
model to describe the dynamics that led to the housing bubble in the US
that peaked in 2006 (Zhou and Sornette, 2006). At every time step, the
agents have the choice to pay a monthly coupon or to pay oﬀthe remaining
balance (prepay). The conventional method makes a guess for the functional
form of the prepayments over time, which basically boils down to extrapolate
into the future past patterns in the data. In contrast, the ABM takes into
account the heterogeneity of the agents through a parameterization with two
variables that are speciﬁc to each agent: the cost of prepaying the mortgage
and the alertness to his ﬁnancial situation. A simulation of such agents acting
in the housing market is able to capture the run up in housing price and
the subsequent crash. The dominating factor driving this dynamic could be
identiﬁed as the leverage the agents get from easily accessible mortgages. The
conventional model entirely missed this dynamic and was therefore unable
to forecast the bust. Of course, this does not mean that non-ABM models
have not been able or would not be able to develop the insight about the
important role of the procyclicality of the leverage on real-estate prices and
vice-versa, a mechanism that has been well and repeatedly described in the
literature after the crisis in 2007-2008 erupted.
Hommes (2006) provides an early survey on dynamic behavioral ﬁnancial
and economic models with rational agents with bounded rationality using
diﬀerent heuristics. He emphases the class of relatively simple models for
which some tractability is obtained by using analytic methods in combina-
tion with computational tools. Nonlinear structures often lead to chaotic
dynamics, far from an equilibrium point, in which regime switching is the
natural occurrence associated with coexisting attractors in the presence of
stochasticity (Yukalov et al., 2009). By the aggregation of relatively sim-
ple interactions occurring at the micro level, quite sophisticated structure
at the macro level may emerge, providing explanations for observed stylized
facts in ﬁnancial time series, such as excess volatility, high trading volume,
temporary bubbles and trend following, sudden crashes and mean reversion,
clustered volatility and fat tails in the returns distribution.
Chiarella et al. (2009) review another branch of investigation of bound-
edly rational heterogeneous agent models of ﬁnancial markets, with particular
emphasis to the role of the market clearing mechanism, the utility function of
the investors, the interaction of price and wealth dynamics, portfolio implica-
tions, and the impact of stochastic elements on market dynamics. Chiarella et
al. ﬁnd regimes with market instabilities and stochastic bifurcations, leading
to fat tails, volatility clustering, large excursions from the fundamental, and
40


--- Page 41 ---
bubbles, which are features of real markets that are not easily reconcilable
for the standard ﬁnancial market paradigm.
Shiozawa et al., 2008 summarize the main properties and ﬁnding resulting
from the U-Mart project, which creates a virtual futures market on a stock
index using a computer or network in order to promote on-site training,
education, and economics research. In the U-Mart platform, human players
can interact with algorithms, providing a rich experimental platform.
Building on the insight that when past information is limited to a rolling
window of prior states of ﬁxed length, the minority, majority and dollar
games may all be expressed in Markov-chain formulation (Marsili et al. 2000,
Hart et al. 2002, Satinover and Sornette 2007a,b), Satinover and Sornette
(2012a,b) have further shown how, for minority and majority games, a cycle
decomposition method allows to quantify the inherently probabilistic nature
of a Markov chain underlying the dynamics of the models as an exact su-
perposition of deterministic cyclic sequences (Hamiltonian cycles on binary
graphs), extending ideas discussed by Jeﬀeries et al. (2002). This provides
a novel technique to decompose the sign of the time-series they generate
(analogous to a market price time-series) into a superposition of weighted
Hamiltonian cycles on graphs. The cycle decomposition also provides a dis-
section of the internal dynamics of the games and a quantitative measure of
the degree of determinism. The performance of diﬀerent classes of strategies
may be understood on a cycle-by-cycle basis. The decomposition oﬀers a
new metric for comparing diﬀerent game dynamics with real-world ﬁnancial
time-series and a method for generating predictors. A cycle predictor applied
to a real-world market can generate signiﬁcantly positive returns.
Feng et al. (2012) use an agent-based model that suggests a dominant
role for the investors using technical strategies over those with fundamen-
tal investment styles, showing that herding emerges via the mechanism of
converging on similar technical rules and trading styles in creating the well-
known excess volatility phenomenon (Shiller, 1981; LeRoy and Porter, 1981;
LeRoy, 2008). This suggests that there is more to price dynamics than just
exogeneity (e.g. the dynamics of dividends). Samanidou et al. (2007) review
several agent-based models of ﬁnancial markets, which have been studied by
economists and physicists over the last decade: Kim-Markowitz, Levy-Levy-
Solomon (1994), Cont-Bouchaud, Solomon-Weisbuch, Lux-Marchesi (1999;
2000), Donangelo-Sneppen and Solomon-Levy-Huang. These ABM empha-
size the importance of heterogeneity, of noise traders (Black, 1986) or tech-
nical analysis based investment styles, and of herding. Lux (2009a) reviews
simple stochastic models of interacting traders, whose design is closer in spirit
to models of multiparticle interaction in physics than to traditional asset-
pricing models, reﬂecting the insight emergent properties at the macroscopic
41


--- Page 42 ---
level are often independent of the microscopic details of the system. Hasan-
hodzic et al. (2011) provides a computational view of market eﬃciency, by
implementing agent-based models in which agents with diﬀerent resources
(e.g, memories) perform diﬀerently. This approach is very promising to un-
derstand the relative nature of market eﬃciency (relative with respect to
resources such as super-computer power and intellectual capital) and pro-
vides a rationalization of the technological arm race of quantitative trading
ﬁrms.
7.2
Outstanding open problems: robustness and cali-
bration/validation of agent-based models
The above short review gives a positive impression on the potential of
ABMs.
In fact, orthodox (neoclassical) economists have in a sense taken
stock of the advances provided by ABMs by extending their models to in-
clude ingredients of heterogeneity, bounded rationality, learning, increasing
returns, and technological change. Why then are not ABMs more pervasive
in the work of economists and in the process of decision making in central
banks and regulators? We think that there are two dimensions to this ques-
tion, which are interconnected (see also Windrum et al, 2007).
First, ABMs have the disadvantage of being complicated with strong
nonlinearities and stochasticity in the individual behaviors, made of multiple
components connected through complex interactive networks, and it is often
diﬃcult to relate the resulting outcomes from the constituting ingredients. In
addition, the feedbacks between the micro and macro levels lead to complex
behavior that cannot be analyzed analytically, for instance by the powerful
tool of the renormalization group theory (Wilson, 1979; Goldenfeld, 1993;
Cardy, 1996), which has been so successful in statistical physics in solving
the micro-macro problem (Anderson, 1972; Sornette, 2004) by the ﬂow of the
change of the descriptive equations of a complex system when analyzed at
diﬀerent resolution scales. The diﬀerent types of agents and their associated
decision making rules can be chosen without much restrictions to encompass
the available knowledge in decision theory and behavioral economics. How-
ever, the choices made to build a given agent-based model may represent the
personal preferences or biases of the modeler, which would not be agreeable
to another modeler. ABMs are often constructed with the goal of illustrating
a given behavior, which is actually already encoded more or less explicitly
in the chosen rules (De Grauwe, 2010; Galla and Farmer, 2013). Therefore,
the correctness of the model relies mostly on the relevance of the used rules,
and the predictive power is often constrained to a particular domain so that
42


--- Page 43 ---
generalization is not obvious. This makes it diﬃcult to compare the diﬀerent
ABMs found in the literature and gives an impression of lack of robustness
in the results that are often sensitive to details of the modelers choices. The
situation is somewhat similar to that found with artiﬁcial neural network,
the computational models inspired by animals’ central nervous systems that
are capable of machine learning and pattern recognition. While providing
interesting performance, artiﬁcial neural networks are black boxes: it is gen-
erally very diﬃcult if not impossible to extract a qualitative understanding
of the reasons for their performance and ability to solve a speciﬁc task. We
can summarize this ﬁrst diﬃculty as the micro-macro problem, namely un-
derstanding how micro-ingredients and rules transform into macro-behaviors
at the collective level when aggregated over many agents.
The second related problem is that of calibration and validation (Sornette
et al., 2007). Standard DSGE models of an economy, for instance, provide
speciﬁc regression relations that are relatively easy to calibrate to a cross-
sectional set of data. In contrast, the general problem of calibrating ABMs is
unsolved. By calibrating, we refer to the problem of determining the values
of the parameters (and their uncertainty intervals) that enter in the deﬁnition
of the ABM, which best corresponds to a given set of empirical data. Due to
the existence of nonlinear chaotic or more complex dynamical behaviors, the
likelihood function is in general very diﬃcult if not impossible to determine
and standard statistical methods (maximum likelihood estimation (MLE))
cannot apply. Moreover, due to the large number of parameters present in
large scale ABMs, calibration suﬀers from the curse of dimensionality and of
ill-conditioning: small errors in the empirical data can be ampliﬁed into large
errors in the calibrated parameters. We think that it is not exaggerated to
state that the major obstacle for the general adoption of ABMs by economists
and policy makers is the absence of a solid theoretical foundation for and
eﬃcient reliable operational calibration methods.
This diagnostic does not mean that there have not been attempts, some-
time quite successful, in calibrating ABMs. Windrum et al. (2007) review the
advances and discuss the methodological problems arising in the empirical
calibration and validation of agent-based models in economics. They classify
the calibration methods into three broad classes: (i) the indirect calibration
approach, (ii) the Werker-Brenner approach, and (iii) the history-friendly.
They have also identiﬁed six main methodological and operational issues
with ABM calibration: (1) ﬁtness does not imply necessarily that the true
generating process has been correctly identiﬁed; (2) the quest for feasible cal-
ibration inﬂuences the type of ABMs that are constructed; (3) the quality of
the available empirical data; (4) the possible non-ergodicity of the real world
generating process and the issue of representativeness of short historical time
43


--- Page 44 ---
series; (5) possible time-dependence of the micro and macro parameters.
Restricting our attention to ﬁnancial markets, an early eﬀort of ABM
calibration is that of Poggio et al. (2001), who constructed a computer simu-
lation of a repeated double-auction market. Using six diﬀerent experimental
designs, the calibration was of the indirect type, with attempt to match the
price eﬃciency of the market, the speed at which prices converge to the
rational expectations equilibrium price, the dynamics of the distribution of
wealth among the diﬀerent types of artiﬁcial Intelligent agents, trading vol-
ume, bid/ask spreads, and other aspects of market dynamics. Among the
ABM studies touched upon above, that of Chiarella et al. (2009) include an
implementation of the indirect calibration approach. Similarly, Bianchi et
al. (2007) develop a methodology to calibrate the Complex Adaptive Trivial
System (CATS) model proposed by Gallegati et al. (2005), again matching
several statistical outputs associated with diﬀerent stylized facts of the ABM
to the empirical data. Fabretti (2013) uses a combination of mean and stan-
dard deviation, kurtosis, Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics and Hurst exponent
for the statistical objects determined from the ABM developed by Farmer
and Joshi (2002) whose distance to the real statistics should be minimized.
Alfarano et al. (2005) studied a very simple ABM that reproduces the
most studied stylized facts (fat tails, volatility clustering). The simplicity
of the model allows the authors to derive a closed form solution for the
distribution of returns and hence to develop a rigorous maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) approach to the calibration of the ABM. The analytical
analysis provides an explicit link between the exponent of the unconditional
power law distribution of returns and some structural parameters, such as the
herding propensity and the autonomous switching tendency. This is a rare
example for which the calibration of the ABM is similar to more standard
problems of calibration in econometrics.
Andersen and Sornette (2005) introduced a direct history-friendly cal-
ibration method of the Minority game on time series of ﬁnancial returns,
which statistically signiﬁcant abnormal performance to detect special pock-
ets of predictability associated with turning points. Roughly speaking, this
is done by calibrating many times the ABM to the data and by performing
meta-searches in the set of parameters and strategies, while imposing robust-
ness constraints to address the intrinsic ill-conditional nature of the problem.
One of the advantages is to remove possible biases of the modeler (except for
the fact that the structure of the model reﬂects itself a view of what should
be the structure of the market). This work by Andersen and Sornette (2005)
was one of the ﬁrst to establish the existence of pockets of predictability in
stock markets. A theoretical analysis showed that when a majority of agents
follows a decoupled strategy, namely the immediate future has no impact
44


--- Page 45 ---
on the longer-term choice of the agents, a transient predictable aggregate
move of the market occurs. It has been possible to estimate the frequency of
such prediction days if the strategies and histories were randomly chosen. A
statistical test, using the Nasdaq Composite Index as a proxy for the price
history, conﬁrms that it is possible to ﬁnd prediction days with a probability
extremely higher then chance.
Another interesting application is to use the ABM to issue forecasts that
are used to further reﬁne the calibration as well as test the predictive power
of the model. To achieve this, the strategies of the agents become in a certain
sense a variable, which is optimized to obtain the best possible calibration of
the in-sample data. Once the optimal strategies are identiﬁed, the predictive
power of the simulation can be tested on the out-of-sample data. Statis-
tical tests have shown that the model performs signiﬁcantly better than a
set of random strategies used as comparison (Andersen and Sornette; 2005;
Wiesinger et al., 2012). These results are highly relevant, because they show
that it seems possible to extract from times series information about the fu-
ture development of the series using the highly nonlinear structure of ABMs.
Applied to ﬁnancial return time series, the calibration and subsequent fore-
cast show that the highly liquid ﬁnancial markets (e.g. S&P500 index) have
progressively evolved towards better eﬃciency from the 1970s to present
(Wiesenger et al., 2012). Nevertheless, there seems to remain statistically
signiﬁcant arbitrage opportunities (Zhang, 2013), which seems inconsistent
with the weak form of the eﬃcient market hypothesis (EMH). This method
lays down the path to a novel class of statistical falsiﬁcation of the EMH. As
the method is quite generic, it can virtually be applied on any time series
to check how well the EMH holds from the viewpoint oﬀered by the ABM.
Further on, this approach has wide potential to reverse engineer many more
stylized facts observed in ﬁnancial markets.
Lillo et al. (2008) present results obtained in the rare favorable situa-
tion in which the empirical data is plentiful, with access to a comprehensive
description of the strategies followed by the ﬁrms that are members of the
Spanish Stock Exchange. This provides a rather unique opportunity for val-
idating the assumptions about agents preferred stylized strategies in ABMs.
The analysis indicates that three well-deﬁned groups of agents (ﬁrms) char-
acterize the stock exchange.
Saskia Ter and Zwinkels (2010) have modeled the oil price dynamics with
a heterogeneous agent model that, as in many other ABMs, incorporates two
types of investors, the fundamentalists and the chartists and their relation
to the fundamental supply and demand. The fundamentalists, who expect
the oil price to move towards the fundamental price, have a stabilizing eﬀect,
while the chartists have a destabilizing eﬀect driving the oil price away from
45


--- Page 46 ---
its fundamental value. The ABM has been able to outperform in an out-
of-sample test both the random walk model and VAR models for the Brent
and WTI market, providing a kind of partial history-friendly calibration ap-
proach.
7.3
The “Emerging Market Intelligence Hypothesis”
Financial markets can be considered as the engines that transform infor-
mation into price. The eﬃcient market hypothesis (EMH) states that the
continuous eﬀorts of diligent investors aggregate into a price dynamics that
does not contain any arbitrage opportunities (Samuelson, 1965; 1973; Fama,
1970; 1991). In other words, the very process of using better information or
new technology to invest with the goal of generating proﬁts in excess to the
long-term historical market growth rate makes the prices unfathomable and
destroys the very goals of the investors.
Farmer (2002) constructed simple set-ups in which the mean-reversion
nature of investors’ strategies stabilise prices and tends to remove arbi-
trage opportunities.
Satinover and Sornette (2007a;b; 2009) showed how
the “whitening” (i.e. destruction of any predictive patterns) of the prices
precisely occur in minority games (Challet and Zhang, 1998; 1999; Chal-
let et al., 2005). Speciﬁcally, agents who optimize their strategy based on
available information actually perform worse than non-optimizing agents. In
other words, low-entropy (more informative) strategies under-perform high-
entropy (or random) strategies. This results from an emergent property of
the whole game that no non-random strategy can outwit. Minority games
can be considered as subset of ﬁrst-entry games, for which the same phe-
nomenon holds (Duﬀy and Hopkins, 2005). In ﬁrst-entry games, this means
that agents who learn on stochastic ﬁctitious plays will adapt and modify
their strategies to ﬁnally converge to the best strategies, which randomize
over the entry decisions. Thus, in minority and ﬁrst-entry games, when play-
ers think that they can put some sense to the patterns created by the games,
that they have found a winning strategy and they have an advantage, they
are delusional since the true winning strategies are random.
In reality, eﬃcient markets do not exist. Grossman and Stiglitz (1980)
articulated in a simpliﬁed model the essence of a quite intuitive mechanism:
because gathering information is costly, prices cannot perfectly reﬂect all the
information that is available since this would confer no competitive advan-
tage to those who spent resources to obtain it and trade on it, therefore
destroying the very mechanism by which information is incorporated into
prices. As a consequence, an informationally eﬃcient market is impossible
and the Eﬃcient Market Hypothesis (EMH) can only be a ﬁrst-order approx-
46


--- Page 47 ---
imation, an asymptotic ideal construct that is never reached in practice. It
can be approached but a convergence towards it unleash eﬀective repelling
forces due to dwindling incentives. “The abnormal returns always exist to
compensate for the costs of gathering and processing information. These re-
turns are necessary to compensate investors for their information-gathering
and information-processing expenses, and are no longer abnormal when these
expenses are properly accounted for. The proﬁts earned by the industrious
investors gathering information may be viewed as economic rents that ac-
crue to those willing to engage in such activities” (cited from Campbell et
al., 1997).
Let us push this reasoning in order to illuminate further the nature and
limits of the EMH and as a bonus clarify the nature and origin of “noise
traders” (Black, 1986). As illustrated by the short review of section 7.1, the
concept of “noise trader” is an essential constituent of most ABMs that aim
at explaining the excess volatility, fat-tailed distributions of asset returns,
as well as the astonishing occurrence of bubbles and crashes. It also solves
the problem of the no-trade theorem (Milgrom and Stokey, 1982), which
in essence shows that no investor will be willing to trade if the market is
in a state of eﬃcient equilibrium and there are no noise traders or other
non-rational interferences with prices. Intuitively, if there is a well-deﬁned
fundamental value, all well-informed rational traders agree on it, the market
prices is the fundamental value and everybody holds the stock according to
their portfolio allocation strategy reﬂecting their risk proﬁles. No trade is
possible without the existence of exogenous shocks, changes of fundamental
values or taste alterations.
In reality, real ﬁnancial markets are heavily traded, with at each tick an
exact balance between the total volume of buyers and of sellers (by deﬁ-
nition of each realised trade), reﬂecting a generalised disagreement on the
opportunity to hold the corresponding stocks. These many investors who
agree to trade and who trade much more than would be warranted on the
basis of fundamental information are called noise traders. Noise traders are
loosely deﬁned as the investors who makes decisions regarding buy and sell
trades without much use of fundamental data, but rather on the basis of price
patterns, trends, and who react incorrectly to good and bad news. On one
side, traders exhibit over-reaction, which refers to the phenomenon that price
responses to news events are exaggerated. A proposed explanation is that
excess price pressure is applied by overconﬁdent investors (Bondt and Thaler,
1985; Daniel et al., 1998) or momentum traders (Hong and Stein, 1999), re-
sulting in an over- or under-valued asset, which then increases the likelihood
of a rebound and thus creates a negative autocorrelation in returns. On the
other side, investors may under-react, resulting in a slow internalisation of
47


--- Page 48 ---
news into price.
Due to such temporally spread-out impact of the news,
price dynamics exhibit momentum, i.e. positive return autocorrelation (Lo
and MacKinlay, 1988; Jegadeesh, 1990; Cutler, 1990; Jegadeesh and Titman,
1993).
In fact, most investors and portfolio managers are considered noise traders
(Malkiel, 2012)! In other words, after controlling for luck, there is a general
consensus in the ﬁnancial academic literature that most fund managers do
not provide statistically signiﬁcant positive returns above the market return
that would be obtained by just buying and holding for the long term (Barras
et al., 2010; Fama and French, 2010). This prevalence of noise traders is in
accord with the EMH. But are these investors really irrational and mindless?
This seems diﬃcult to reconcile with the evidence that the banking and
investment industry has been able in the last decades to attract a signiﬁcant
fraction of the best minds and most motivated persons on Earth.
Many
have noticed and even complained that, in the years before the ﬁnancial
crisis of 2008, the best and brightest college grads were heading for Wall
Street. At ETH Zurich where I teach ﬁnancial market risks and tutor master
theses, I have observed even after the ﬁnancial crisis a growing ﬂood of civil,
mechanical, electrical and other engineers choosing to defect from their ﬁeld
and work in ﬁnance and banking.
Consequently, we propose that noise traders are actually highly intelligent
motivated and capable investors. They are like noise traders as a result of
the aggregation of the collective intelligence of all trading strategies that
structure the price dynamics and makes each of the individual strategy look
“stupid”, like noise trading. The whole is more than the sum of the part. In
other words, a universe of rational optimizing traders create endogenously
a large fraction of rational traders who are eﬀectively noise, because their
strategies are like noise, given the complexity or structure of ﬁnancial and
economic markets that they collectively create. The continuous actions of
investors, which are aggregated in the prices, produce a “market intelligence”
more powerful than that of most of them. The “collective intelligence” of
the market transforms most (but not all) strategies into losing strategies,
just providing liquidity and transaction volume. We call this the “Emerging
Market Intelligence hypothesis” (EIMH). This phrasing stresses the collective
intelligence that dwarfs the individual ones, making them look like noise when
applied to the price structures resulting from the price formation process.
But for this EIMH to hold, the “noise traders” need a motivation to
continue trading, in the face of their collective dismal performances. In ad-
dition to the role of monetary incentives for rent-seeking that permeates
the banking industry (Freeman, 2010) and makes working in ﬁnance very
attractive notwithstanding the absence of genuine performance, there is a
48


--- Page 49 ---
well-documented fact in the ﬁeld of psychology that human beings in gen-
eral and investors in particular (and especially traders who are (self-)selected
for their distinct abilities and psychological traits) tend to rate their skills
over-optimistically (Kruger and Dunning, 1999). And when by chance, some
performance emerges, we tend to attribute the positive outcome to our skills.
When a negative outcome occurs, this is bad luck. This is referred to in the
psychological literature as “illusion of control” (Langer 1975). In addition,
human beings have evolved the ability to attribute meaning and regularity
when there is none. In the psychological literature, this is related to the
fallacy of “hasty generalisation” (“law of small numbers”) and to “retrospec-
tive determinism”, which makes us look at historical events as part of an
unavoidable meaningful laminar ﬂow. All these elements combine to gener-
ate a favourable environment to catalyse trading, by luring especially young
bright graduate students to ﬁnance in the belief that their intelligence and
technical skills will allow them to “beat the market”.
Thus, building on
our cognitive biases and in particular on over-optimism, one could say that
the incentive structures of the ﬁnancial industry provides the remunerations
for the individuals who commit themselves to arbitrage the ﬁnancial mar-
kets, thereby providing an almost eﬃcient functioning machine. The noise
traders naturally emerge as a result of the emergent collective intelligence.
This concept is analogous to the sandpile model of self-organised criticality
(Bak, 1996), which consistency functions at the edge of chaos, driven to its
instability but never completely reaching it by the triggering of avalanches
(Scheinkman and Woodford, 1994). Similarly, the incentives of the ﬁnancial
system creates an army of highly motivated and skilled traders who push the
market towards eﬃciency but never succeeding to allow some of them to win,
while make most of them look like noise.
8
Concluding remarks
While it is diﬃcult to argue for a physics-based foundation of economics
and ﬁnance, physics has still a role to play as a unifying framework full
of concepts and tools to deal with complex dynamical out-of-equilibrium
systems. Moreover, the speciﬁc training of physicists explains the impressive
number of recruitments in investment and ﬁnancial institutions, where their
data-driven approach coupled with a pragmatic sense of theorizing has made
physicists a most valuable commodity on Wall Street.
At present however, the most exciting progress seems to be unraveling at
the boundary between economics and the biological, cognitive and behavioral
sciences (Camerer et al., 2003; Shiller, 2003; Thaler 2005). A promising re-
49


--- Page 50 ---
cent trend is the enrichment of ﬁnancial economics by concepts developed in
evolutionary biology. Several notable groups with very diﬀerent backgrounds
have touched upon the concept that ﬁnancial markets may be similar to ecolo-
gies ﬁlled by species that adapt and mutate. For instance, we mentioned
earlier that Potters et al. (1998) showed that the market has empirically
corrected and adapted to the simple, but inadequate Black-Scholes formula
to account for the fat tails and the correlations in the scale of ﬂuctuations.
Doyne Farmer (2002) proposed a theory based on the interrelationships of
strategies, which views a market as a ﬁnancial ecology. In this ecology, new
better adapted strategies exploit the ineﬃciencies of old strategies and the
evolution of the capital of a strategy is analogous to the evolution of the
population of a biological species. Cars Hommes (2001) also reviewed works
modeling ﬁnancial markets as evolutionary systems constituted of diﬀerent,
competing trading strategies. Strategies are again taken as the analog of
species. It is found that simple technical trading rules may survive evolution-
ary competition in a heterogeneous world where prices and beliefs coevolve
over time. Such evolutionary models can explain most of the stylized facts
of ﬁnancial markets (Chakraborti et al., 2011).
Andrew Lo (2004; 2005; 2011) coined the term “adaptive market hypoth-
esis” in reaction to the “eﬃcient market hypothesis” (Fama, 1970; 1991), to
propose an evolutionary perspective on market dynamics in which intelligent
but fallible investors learn from and adapt to changing environments, lead-
ing to a relationship between risk and expected return that is not constant
in time. In this view, markets are not always eﬃcient but they are highly
competitive and adaptive, and can vary in their degree of eﬃciency as the eco-
nomic environment and investor population change over time. Lo emphasizes
that adaptation in investment strategies (Neelya et al. 2009) are driven by the
“push for survival”. This is perhaps a correct assessment of Warren Buﬀet’s
own stated strategy: “We do not wish it only to be likely that we can meet our
obligations; we wish that to be certain. Thus we adhere to policies – both in
regard to debt and all other matters – that will allow us to achieve acceptable
long-term results under extraordinary adverse conditions, rather than opti-
mal results under a normal range of conditions” (Berkshire Hathaway Annuel
Report 1987: http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1987.html).
But the analogy with evolutionary biology as well as many studies of the be-
havior of bankers and traders (e.g. Coates, 2012) suggest that most market
investors care for much more than just survival. They strive to maximize
their investment success measured as bonus and wealth, which can accrue
with luck on time scales of years. This is akin to maximizing transmission of
“genes” in a biological context (Dawkins, 1976). The focus on survival within
an evolutionary analogy is clearly insuﬃcient to account for the extraordi-
50


--- Page 51 ---
nary large death rate of business companies and in particular of ﬁnancial
ﬁrms such as hedge-funds (Saichev et al., 2010; Malevergne et al., 2013 and
references therein).
But evolutionary biology itself is witnessing a revolution with genomics,
beneﬁtting from computerized automation and artiﬁcial intelligence classiﬁ-
cation (ENCODE Project Consortium, 2012). And (bio-)physics is bound to
continue playing a growing role to organize the wealth of data in models that
can be handled, playing on the triplet of experimental, computational and
theoretical research. On the question of what could be useful tools to help
understand, use, diagnose, predict and control ﬁnancial markets (Cincotti
et al., 20120; de S. Cavalcante et al. 2013), we envision that both physics
and biology are going to play a growing role to inspire models of ﬁnancial
markets, and the next signiﬁcant advance will be obtained by marrying the
three ﬁelds.
References
[1] Alfarano, S., T. Lux and F. Wagner (2005) Estimation of Agent-Based
Models: The Case of an Asymmetric Herding Model, Computational Eco-
nomics 26, 19-49.
[2] Andersen, J. V., and D. Sornette (2005) A Mechanism for Pockets of
Predictability in Complex Adaptive Systems, Europhysics Letters (EPL)
70.5, 697-703.
[3] Anderson, P.W. (1958) Absence of diﬀusion in certain random lattices,
Phys. Rev. 109, 1492-1505.
[4] Anderson, P.W. (1972) More is diﬀerent (Broken symmetry and the na-
ture of the hierarchical structure of science), Science 177, 393-396.
[5] Arneodo, A., J.-F. Muzy and D. Sornette (1998) Direct causal cascade in
the stock market, European Physical Journal B 2, 277-282 (1998).
[6] Arthur, W. B. (1994a) Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the
Economy, University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
[7] Arthur, W. B. (1994b) Inductive Reasoning and Bounded Rationality,
American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), 84,406-411.
[8] Arthur, W. B. (1997) The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II,
edited with Steven Durlauf and David Lane, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA, Series in the Sciences of Complexity.
51


--- Page 52 ---
[9] Arthur, W. B. (2005) Out-of-Equilibrium Economics and Agent-Based
Modeling, in Handbook of Computational Economics, Vol. 2: Agent-Based
Computational Economics, K. Judd and L. Tesfatsion, eds. (Elsevier /
North Holland).
[10] Arthur, W. B., J. H. Holland, B. LeBaron, R. Palmer, and P. Tayler
(1997) Asset pricing under endogenous expectations in an artiﬁcial stock
market. In W. B. Arthur, S. N. Durlauf, and D. A. Lane, editors, The
Economy as an Evolving Complex System II, volume 27 of SFI Studies
in the Sciences of Complexity, pages 15-44. Santa Fe Institute, Addison-
Wesley.
[11] Axelrod, R. (2005) Agent-based modelling as a bridge between disci-
plines, in Kenneth L. Judd and Leigh Tesfatsion (Eds.), Handbook of Com-
putational Economics, Vol. 2: Agent-Based Computational Economics,
Handbooks in Economics Series, North-Holland.
[12] Bachelier, L. (1900) Thorie de la speculation, Annales de lEcole Nor-
male Suprieure (translated in the book Random Character of Stock Mar-
ket Prices); Thorie des probabilits continues, 1906, Journal des Mathema-
tiques Pures et Appliques; Les Probabilits cinematiques et dynamiques,
1913, Annales de lEcole Normale Suprieure.
[13] Bacry, E., J. Delour and J.-F. Muzy (2001) Multifractal random walk,
Physical Review E 64, 026103.
[14] Bacry, E., A. Kozhemyak and J. F. Muzy (2013) Log-normal continuous
cascade model of asset returns: aggregation properties and estimation,
Quantitative Finance, 13 (5), 795-818.
[15] Bak, P. (1996) How Nature Works: the Science of Self-organized Criti-
cality (Copernicus, New York).
[16] Barras, L., O. Scaillet and R. Wermers (2010) False Discoveries in Mu-
tual Fund Performance: Measuring Luck in Estimated Alphas, The Jour-
nal of Finance 65 (1), 179-216.
[17] Bawa, V.S., E.J. Elton and M.J. Gruber (1979) Simple rules for optimal
portfolio selection in stable Paretian markets, Journal of Finance 34 (4),
1041-1047.
[18] Bianchi, C., P. Cirillo, M. Gallegati, and P.A. Vagliasindi (2007) Validat-
ing and Calibrating Agent-Based Models: A Case Study, Computational
Economics 30 (3), 245-264.
52


--- Page 53 ---
[19] Biely, C., R. Hanel and S. Thurner (2009) Socio-economical dynamics
as a solvable spin system on co-evolving networks, Eur. Phys. J. B 67,
285-289.
[20] Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., and Welch, I. (1992) A Theory of
Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades,
Journal of Political Economy 100 (5), 992-1026.
[21] Bishop, C.M. (2006) Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning,
Springer, 738pp.
[22] Black, F. (1985) Noise, Journal of Finance 41 (3), 529-543.
[23] Black, F. and M. Scholes (1973)The Pricing of Options and Corporate
Liabilities, Journal of Political Economy 81 (3), 637-654.
[24] Bonabeau, E. (2002) Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques
for simulating human systems, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99 (3), 7280-
7287.
[25] Bondt, W.F. and R. Thaler (1985) Does the Stock Market Overreact?
The Journal of Finance 40 (3), 793-805.
[26] Bornholdt, S. (2001) Expectation bubbles in a spin model of market in-
termittency from frustration across scales, International Journal of Modern
Physics C 12 (5), 667-674.
[27] Bouchaud, J-P. (2001) Power laws in economics and ﬁnance: some ideas
from physics, Quantitative Finance 1 (1), 105-112.
[28] Bouchaud, J.-P. (2010) Price impact, in Encyclopedia of Quantitative
Finance, R. Cont, ed., John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
[29] Bouchaud, J.-P. (2013), Crises and Collective Socio-Economic Phenom-
ena: Simple Models and Challenges, J Stat Phys (2013) 151:567-606.
[30] Bouchaud, J.-P. and R. Cont (1998) A Langevin approach to stock mar-
ket ﬂuctuations and crashes, Eur. Phys. J. B 6, 543-550.
[31] Bouchaud, J.-P., J.D. Farmer, and F. Lillo (2009) How markets slowly
digest changes in supply and demand, in Handbook of Financial Markets,
Elsevier.
[32] Bouchaud, J.-P. and M. Potters (2003) Theory of Financial Risk and
Derivative Pricing, From Statistical Physics to Risk Management, 2nd ed.
(Cambridge University Press).
53


--- Page 54 ---
[33] Bouchaud, J.-P. and D. Sornette (1994) The Black-Scholes option pric-
ing problem in mathematical ﬁnance : Generalization and extensions for
a large class of stochastic processes, J.Phys. I France 4, 863-881.
[34] Bouchaud, J.-P., D. Sornette, C. Walter and J.-P. Aguilar (1998) Taming
large events : Optimal portfolio theory for strongly ﬂuctuating assets,
International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 1, 25-41.
[35] Brock, W.A. and S.N. Durlauf (1999) A formal model of theory choice
in science, Economic Theory 14, 113-130.
[36] Brock and Durlauf (2001) Discrete Choice with Social Interactions, Re-
view of Economic Studies 68, 235-260.
[37] Brunnermeier, M.K. and M. Oehmke (September 2012) NBER Working
Paper No. 18398 (http://www.nber.org/papers/w18398)
[38] Brush, S. G. (1967) History of the Lenz-Ising Model, Reviews of Modern
Physics 39 (4), 883-893.
[39] Busemeyer, J.R. and P.D. Bruza (2012) Quantum Models of Cognition
and Decision, Cambridge University Press; 1 edition (September 17).
[40] Busemeyer, J.R., Z. Wang and J.T. Townsend, (2006) Quantum dy-
namics of human decision making, Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
50, 220-241.
[41] Callen, E. and Shapero, D. (1974) A theory of social imitation, Phys.
Today 27 (7) 23-28.
[42] Calvet, L. and A.J. Fisher, A. (2001) Forecasting multifractal volatility,
Journal of Econometrics 105, 27-58.
[43] Calvet, L.E. and A.J. Fisher (2008) Multifractal volatility theory, fore-
casting, and pricing. Burlington, MA: Academic Press.
[44] Camerer, C.F., G. Loewenstein and M. Rabin, editors (2003) Advances
in Behavioral Economics, (Roundtable Series in Behavioral Economics),
Princeton University Press.
[45] Campbell, J.Y., A.W. Lo and A.C. MacKinlay (1997) The Econometrics
of Financial Markets. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
[46] Carhart, M.M.. (1997) On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,
Journal of Finance 52 (1), 57-82.
54


--- Page 55 ---
[47] Cardy, J.L. (1996) Scaling and Renormalization in Statistical Physics
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK).
[48] Chakraborti, A., M. Toke, M. Patriarca and F. Abergel (2011) Econo-
physics review: I. Empirical facts, Quantitative Finance 11 (7), 991-1012.
[49] Challet, D., M. Marsili, Y.-C. Zhang (2005) Minority Games: Interact-
ing Agents in Financial Markets, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[50] Challet, D. and Zhang, Y.C. (1997) Emergence of cooperation and or-
ganization in an evolutionary game. Physica A 246 (3), 407-418.
[51] Challet, D. and Zhang, Y.C. (1998) On the minority game: Analytical
and numerical studies. Physica A 256 (3/4), 514-532.
[52] Chiarella, C., R. Dieci and X.-Z. He (2009) Heterogeneity, Market Mech-
anisms, and Asset Price Dynamics, Handbook of Financial Markets, Dy-
namics and Evolution, North-Holland, Elsevier.
[53] Cincotti, S., D. Sornette, P. Treleaven, S. Battiston, G. Caldarelli, C.
Hommes and A. Kirman (2012) An economic and ﬁnancial exploratory,
European Journal of Physics: Special Topics 214, 361-400.
[54] Clauset, A., C. Rohilla Shalizi, and M. E. J. Newman (2009) Power-law
distributions in empirical data, SIAM Review 51, 661-703.
[55] Coates, J. (2012) The Hour Between Dog and Wolf: Risk Taking, Gut
Feelings and the Biology of Boom and Bust, Penguin Press.
[56] Colander, D., M. Goldberg, A. Haas, K. Juselius, A. Kirman, T. Lux
and B. Sloth (2009) The ﬁnancial crisis and the systemic failure of the
economics profession, Critical Review 21 (2), 249-267.
[57] Cootner, P.H. (1964) The random character of stock market prices, MIT
Press (ISBN 978-0-262-03009-0).
[58] Crane, R. and D. Sornette (2008) Robust dynamic classes revealed by
measuring the response function of a social system, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
USA 105 (41), 15649-15653.
[59] Cutler, D. M., J.M. Poterba and L.H. Summers (1990) peculative Dy-
namics and the Role of Feedback Traders The American Economic Review
80 (2), 63-68.
55


--- Page 56 ---
[60] Daniel, K., D. Hirshleifer and A. Subrahmanyam (1998) Investor Psy-
chology and Security Market Under- and Overreactions, The Journal of
Finance 53 (6), 1839-1885.
[61] Darley, V. and A.V. Outkin (2007) A Nasdaq market simulation (In-
sights on a major market from the science of complex adaptive systems),
Complex Systems and Interdisciplinary Science, World Scientiﬁc, Singa-
pore.
[62] Dawkins, R. (1976) The Selﬁsh Gene, New York City: Oxford University
Press.
[63] De Grauwe, P. (2010) The Scientiﬁc Foundation of Dynamic Stochastic
General Equilibrium (DSGE) Models, Public Choice 144 (3-4), 413-443.
[64] de S. Cavalcante, H.L.D., M. Ori´a, D. Sornette, E. Ott and D.J. Gauthier
(2013) Predictability and control of extreme events in complex systems,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 198701 [5 pages].
[65] Derman, E. (2004) My Life as a Quant: Reﬂections on Physics and
Finance, Wiley.,
[66] Deschatres, F. and D. Sornette (2005) The Dynamics of Book Sales:
Endogenous versus Exogenous Shocks in Complex Networks, Phys. Rev.
E 72, 016112.
[67] Dezso, Z., E. Almaas, A. Lukacs, B. Racz, I. Szakadat, A.-L. Barabasi
(2006) Dynamics of information access on the web, Phys. Rev. E 73,
066132.
[68] Duﬀy, J. and E. Hopkins (2005) Learning, information, and sorting in
market entry games: theory and evidence, Games and Economic behavior
51 (1), 31-62.
[69] Dyson, F. (1988) Inﬁnite in all directions (Penguin, London).
[70] Ehrentreich, N. (2008) Agent-Based Modeling: The Santa Fe Institute
Artiﬁcial Stock Market Model Revisited, Lecture Notes in Economics and
Mathematical Systems, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg.
[71] Einstein, A. (1905) On the Motion of Small Particles Suspended in Liq-
uids at Rest Required by the Molecular-Kinetic Theory of Heat, Ann.
Phys., Lpz 17, 549-560.
56


--- Page 57 ---
[72] Embrechts, P., C. Kluppelberg and T. Mikosch (1997) Modelling Ex-
tremal Events for Insurance and Finance (Springer, New York).
[73] ENCODE Project Consortium (2012) An integrated encyclopedia of
DNA elements in the human genome, Nature 489, 57-74.
[74] Evstigneev I.V., T. Hens and K. R. Schenk-Hopp (2009) Evolutionary
Finance, Evolutionary Finance, Handbook of Financial Markets, Dynam-
ics and Evolution, North-Holland, Elsevier.
[75] Fabretti,
A.
(2011)
Calibration
of
an
Agent
Based
Model
for
Financial
Markets,
In
Highlights
in
Practical
Appli-
cations
of
Agents
and
Multiagent
Systems,
1-8.
Springer,
(http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-19917-2_1).
[76] Fama, E. (1965) Portfolio analysis in a stable Paretian market, Manage-
ment Science 11 (3), 404-419.
[77] Fama, E.J. (1970) Eﬃcient capital markets: a review of theory and
empirical work, Journal of Finance 25, 383-417.
[78] Fama, E.J. (1991) Eﬃcient capital markets: II, Journal of Finance 46
(5), 1575-1617.
[79] Fama, E.F.; and K.R. French (1993) Common Risk Factors in the Re-
turns on Stocks and Bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1), 3-56.
[80] Fama, Eugene F. and French, Kenneth R. (2010) Luck versus Skill in
the Cross-Section of Mutual Fund Returns The Journal of Finance 65 (5),
1915-1947.
[81] Farmer, J.D. (2002) Market forces, ecology and evolution, Industrial and
Corporate Change 11 (5), 895-953.
[82] Farmer, J. D. and J. Geanakoplos (2009) The virtues and vices of equi-
librium and the future of nancial economics, Complexity 14 (3),11-38.
[83] Farmer, J.D., A. Gerig, F. Lillo and H. Waelbroeck (2013) How eﬃciency
shapes market impact (http://arxiv.org/abs/1102.5457).
[84] Farmer, J. D., L. Gillemot, F. Lillo, S. Mike, S. and A. Sen (2004) What
really causes large price changes? Quant. Finance 4(4), 383-397.
[85] Farmer, J.D. and S. Joshi (2002) The price dynamics of common trading
strategies, J. Econ. Behav. Org. 49, 149-171.
57


--- Page 58 ---
[86] Farmer, J.D. and T. Lux, editors (2008) Applications of statistical
physics in economics and ﬁnance, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Con-
trol 32 (1), 1-320.
[87] Feng, L., B. Lia, B. Podobnik, T. Preisc and H.E. Stanley (2012) Linking
agent-based models and stochastic models of ﬁnancial markets, Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
109 (22), 8388-8393.
[88] Filimonov, V.A and D. Sornette (2011) Self-Excited Multifractal Dy-
namics, Europhysics Letters 94, 46003.
[89] Filimonov, V. and D. Sornette (2012) Quantifying reﬂexivity in ﬁnan-
cial markets: towards a prediction of ﬂash crashes, Phys. Rev. E 85 (5):
056108.
[90] Filimonov, V., D. Bicchetti, N. Maystre and D. Sornette, Quantiﬁca-
tion of the High Level of Endogeneity and of Structural Regime Shifts in
Commodity Prices, submitted to The Journal of International Money and
Finance (JIMF) (http://ssrn.com/abstract=2237392)
[91] Fisher, I. (1933) The Debt Deﬂation Theory of Great Depressions,
Econometrica 1, 337-357.
[92] Freeman, R.B. (2010) It’s ﬁnancialization! International Labour Review
149 (2), 163-183.
[93] F¨ollmer, H. (1974) Random economies with many interacting agents,
Journal of Mathematical Economics 1, 51-62.
[94] Gabaix, X., P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou and H.E. Stanley (2003) A The-
ory of Power Law Distributions in Financial Market Fluctuations, Nature
423, 267-270.
[95] Galam, S. (2004) Sociophysics: A personal testimony, Physica A 336,
49-55.
[96] Galam, S. and Gefen ,Y. and. Shapir, Y. (1982) Sociophysics: A new
approach of sociological collective behavior 1. Mean-behavior description
of a strike, Math. J. Soc. 9, 1-13.
[97] Galam, S. and S. Moscovici (1991) Towards a theory of collective phe-
nomena: consensus and attitude changes in groups, European Journal of
Social Psychology 21, 49-74.
58


--- Page 59 ---
[98] Galla, T. and J.D. Farmer (2013) Complex Dynamics in Learning Com-
plicated Games, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110
(4),1232-1236.
[99] Gallegati, M., Delli Gatti, D., Di Guilmi, C., Gaﬀeo, E., Giulioni, G.
and Palestrini, A. (2005) A new approach to business ﬂuctuations: Het-
erogeneous interacting agents, scaling laws and ﬁnancial fragility. Journal
of Economic Behavior and Organization, 56, 489-512.
[100] Gatheral, J. and A. Schied, Alexander, Dynamical Models of Market
Impact and Algorithms for Order Execution (January 24, 2013). Available
at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2034178.
[101] Geanakoplos, J., R. Axtell, J.D. Farmer, P. Howitt, B. Conlee, J. Gold-
stein, M. Hendrey, N.M. Palmer, and C.-Y. Yang (2012) Getting at Sys-
temic Risk via an Agent-Based Model of the Housing Market, American
Economic Review 102 (3), 53-58.
[102] Gillemot, L., J. D. Farmer, and F. Lillo (2007) Theres More to Volatility
than Volume, Quantitative Finance 6, 371-384.
[103] Gisler, M. and D. Sornette (2009) Exuberant Innovations: The Apollo
Program, Society 46, 55-68.
[104] Gisler, M. and D. Sornette (2010) Bubbles Everywhere in Human Af-
fairs, chapter in book entitled “Modern RISC-Societies. Towards a New
Framework for Societal Evolution”, L. Kajfez Bogataj, K.H. Mueller,
I. Svetlik, N. Tos (eds.), Wien, edition echoraum:
137-153 (2010)
(http://ssrn.com/abstract=1590816)
[105] Gisler, M., D. Sornette and G. Grote (2013) Early dynamics of a major
scientiﬁc project: Testing the social bubble hypothesis, Science, Technol-
ogy and Innovation (submitted) (http://ssrn.com/abstract=2289226)
[106] Gisler, M., D. Sornette and R. Woodard (2011) Innovation as a Social
Bubble: The Example of the Human Genome Project, Research Policy 40,
1412-1425.
[107] Goldenfeld, N., Lectures on phase transitions and the renormalization
group. Addison-Wesley.
[108] Gopikrishnan, P., V. Plerou, L.A.N. Amaral, M. Meyer, and H.E. Stan-
ley (1999) Scaling of the distributions of ﬂuctuations of ﬁnancial market
indices, Physical Review E 60, 5305-5316.
59


--- Page 60 ---
[109] Gordon, M.B. J.-P. Nadal, D. Phan and V. Semeshenko (2009) Discrete
Choices under Social Inﬂuence: Generic Properties Mathematical Models
and Methods in Applied Sciences (M3AS) 19 (Suppl. 1), 1441-1481.
[110] Gould, S.J. (1996) Full House: The Spread of Excellence From Plato
to Darwin (New York: Harmony Books).
[111] Granovetter, M. (1978) Threshold models of collective behavior, Am.
J. Sociol. 83 (6), 1420-1443.
[112] Granovetter, M. and Soong, R. (1983) Threshold models of diﬀusion
and collective behavior, . J. Math. Sociol. 9, 165-179.
[113] Grabowski, A. and R.A. Kosinski (2006) Ising-based model of opinion
formation in a complex network of interpersonal interactions, Physica A
36, 651-664.
[114] Hardiman, S.J., N. Bercot and J.-P. Bouchaud (2013) Critical reﬂex-
ivity in ﬁnancial markets: a Hawkes process analysis, Eur. Phys. J. B (in
press) (http://arxiv.org/abs/1302.1405)
[115] Harras, G. and D. Sornette (2011) How to grow a bubble: A model of
myopic adapting agents, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
80 (1), 137-152.
[116] Harras, G., C. Tessone and D. Sornette (2012) Noise-induced volatility
of collective dynamics, Phys. Rev. E 85, 011150.
[117] Hart, M.L., Jeﬀeries, P. and Johnson, N.F. (2002) Dynamics of the
time horizon minority game. Physica A 311(1), 275-290.
[118] Hasanhodzic, J., A.W. Lo and E. Viola (2011) A computational view
of market eﬃciency Quantitative Finance 11 (7), 1043-1050.
[119] Hawkes, A.G. and Oakes D. (1974) A cluster representation of a self-
exciting process, Journal Applied Prob. 11, 493-503 .
[120] Hommes, C.H. (2001) Financial markets as nonlinear adaptive evolu-
tionary systems, Quantitative Finance 1 (1), 149-167.
[121] Hommes,
C.H.
(2006)
Chapter
23,
Heterogeneous
Agent
Models
in
Economics
and
Finance,
In
Hand-
book
of
Computational
Economics,
2:1109-1186.
Elsevier
(http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S157400210502023X).
60


--- Page 61 ---
[122] Hong, H. and J.C. Stein (1999) A Uniﬁed Theory of Underreaction,
Momentum Trading, and Overreaction in Asset Markets, The Journal of
Finance 54 (6), 2143-2184.
[123] Hopﬁeld, J.J. (1982), Neural networks and physical systems with emer-
gent collective computational abilities, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79 (8).
2554-2558.
[124] Horvath, D. and Z. Kuscsik (2007) Structurally dynamic spin market
networks, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 18, 1361-1374.
[125] Huang, Z.F. and S. Solomon (2002) Stochastic multiplicative processes
for ﬁnancial markets, Physica A 306, 412-422.
[126] Huberman, G. and W. Stanzl (2004) Price Manipulation and Quasi-
Arbitrage, Econometrica 74 (4), 1247-1276.
[127] Janeway, W.H. (2012) Doing Capitalism in the Innovation Economy:
Markets, Speculation and the State, Cambridge University Press.
[128] Jeﬀeries, P., Hart, M.L. and Johnson, N.F. (2002) Deterministic dy-
namics in the minority game. Phys. Rev. E 65, 016105-016113.
[129] Jegadeesh, N. (1990) Evidence of Predictable Behavior of Security Re-
turns The Journal of Finance 45 (3), 881-898.
[130] Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman (1993) Returns to Buying Winners and
Selling Losers: Implications for Stock Market Eﬃciency The Journal of
Finance 48 (1), 65-91.
[131] Jiang, Z.-Q. W.-X. Zhou, D. Sornette, R. Woodard, K. Bastiaensen and
P. Cauwels (2010) Bubble Diagnosis and Prediction of the 2005-2007 and
2008-2009 Chinese stock market bubbles, Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization 74, 149-162.
[132] Johansen, A. and D. Sornette (1998) Stock market crashes are outliers,
European Physical Journal B 1, 141-143.
[133] Johansen, A. and D. Sornette (2001/2002) Large Stock Market Price
Drawdowns Are Outliers, Journal of Risk 4 (2), 69-110.
[134] Johansen,
A.
and
D.
Sornette
(2006)
Shocks,
Crashes
and
Bubbles
in
Financial
Markets,
Brussels
Economic
Review
(Cahiers
economiques
de
Bruxelles)
53
(2),
201-253
(summer
)
(http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0210509)
61


--- Page 62 ---
[135] Johansen, A., D. Sornette and O. Ledoit (1999) Predicting Financial
Crashes using discrete scale invariance, Journal of Risk 1 (4), 5-32.
[136] Johansen, A., O. Ledoit and D. Sornette (2000) Crashes as critical
points, Int. J. Theor. Applied Finance 3 (2) 219-255.
[137] Joulin, A. Lefevre, D. Grunberg, J. P. Bouchaud (2008) Stock price
jumps:
news and volume play a minor role Wilmott Magazine, Vol.
Sep/Oct, pp. 1-7.
[138] Kaizoji, T. (2000) Speculative bubbles and crashes in stock markets:
an interacting-agent model of speculative activity, Physica A 287, 493-506.
[139] Kaizoji, T. and Bornholdt, S. and Fujiwara, Y. (2002) Dynamics of
price and trading volume in a spin model of stock markets with heteroge-
neous agents, Physica A 316, 441-452.
[140] Kaizoji, T., M. Leiss, A. Saichev and D. Sornette (2013) Endogenous
bubbles in an equilibrium model of rational and noise traders without
strategy switching, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control (second
revision) (http://arxiv.org/abs/1109.4726)
[141] Kelly, J. L. (1956) A new interpretation of information rate, Bell Sys-
tem Technical Journal 35, 917-926.
[142] Kindleberger, C.P. (2000) Manias, panics, and crashes: A history of
ﬁnancial crises, 4th Edition. Wiley, New York.
[143] Kirman, A. (1991) Epidemics of opinion and speculative bubbles in
ﬁnancial markets, in M. Taylor (ed.), Money and Financial Markets,
MacMillan.
[144] Kirman, A. (1993) Ants, rationality and recruitment, Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 108, 137-156.
[145] Kirman, A. (2012) Can artiﬁcial economies help us understand real
economies? Revue de lOFCE / Debats & policies 124, 1-27.
[146] Kostanjcar, Z. and B. Jeren (2013) Emergence of power-law and two-
phase behavior in ﬁnancial market ﬂuctuations, Advances in Complex Sys-
tems 16 (1), 1350008 (12 pages).
[147] Krawiecki, A. and Holyst, J. A. and Helbing, D. (2002) Volatility clus-
tering and scaling for ﬁnancial time series due to attractor bubbling, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 89, 158701.
62


--- Page 63 ---
[148] Kruger, J. and D. Dunning (1999) Unskilled and unaware of it: how
diﬃculties in recognising one’s own incompetence lead to inﬂated self-
assessments, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77 (6), 1121-
1134.
[149] Krugman, P. (1996) The Self-Organizing Economy (Blackwell, Malden,
MA).
[150] Kyle, A. (1985) Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica
53 (6), 1315-1335.
[151] Laherrere, J. and D. Sornette (1999) Stretched exponential distribu-
tions in nature and economy: Fat tails with characteristic scales, European
Physical Journal B 2, 525-539.
[152] Langer, E. (1975) The illusion of control, J Person Soc Psychol. 7,
185-207.
[153] LeBaron, B., W. B. Arthur, and R. Palmer (1999) Time series prop-
erties of an artiﬁcial stock market, Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 23 (9-10), 1487-1516.
[154] LeRoy, S. F. (2008) Excess Volatility Tests, The New Palgrave Dictio-
nary of Economics, 2nd ed.
[155] LeRoy, S.F. and R.D. Porter (1981) The present value relation: Tests
based on implied variance bounds, Econometrica 49, 555-574.
[156] Leskovec, J., M. McGlohon, C. Faloutsos, N. Glance and M. Hurst,
Cascading Behavior in Large Blog Graphs, Technical Report CMU-ML-
06-113, October 2006 preprint http://arxiv.org/abs/0704.2803
[157] Levy, M. (2005) Market Eﬃciency, the Pareto Wealth Distribution, and
the Lvy Distribution of Stock Returns, in The Economy as an Evolving
Complex System III, S. Durlauf and L. Blume (Eds.), Oxford University
Press.
[158] Levy, M. and H. Levy, Investment Talent and the Pareto Wealth Dis-
tribution: Theoretical and experimental Analysis, Review of Economics
and Statistics 85 (3), 709-725.
[159] Levy, M., H. Levy, and S. Solomon (1994) A Microscopic Model of the
Stock Market: Cycles, Booms, and Crashes, Economics Letters 45 (1),
103-111.
63


--- Page 64 ---
[160] Liggett,
T.M. (1995) Interacting particle systems (New York :
Springer-Verlag)
[161] Liggett, T.M. (1997) Stochastic models of interacting systems, The
Annals of Probability 25, 1-29.
[162] Lillo, F., E. Moro, G. Vaglica, and R.N. Mantegna (2008) Specialization
and herding behavior of trading ﬁrms in a ﬁnancial market, New Journal
of Physics 10, 043019 (15pp).
[163] Lo, A. (2004) The Adaptive Market Hypothesis: Market Eﬃciency
from an Evolutionary Perspective. The Journal of Portfolio Management
30 (5), 15-29.
[164] Lo, A. (2005) Reconciling Eﬃcient Markets with Behavioral Finance:
The Adaptive Markets Hypothesis, Journal of Investment Consulting 7
(2), 21-44 (Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=728864).
[165] Lo, A. (2011) Adaptive Markets and the New World Order (December
30, 2011). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1977721
[166] Lo, A. W. and A.C. MacKinlay (1988) Stock market prices do not
follow random walks: evidence from a simple speciﬁcation test, Review of
Financial Studies 1 (1), 41-66.
[167] Luce, R. D. (1959) Individual Choice Behavior: A theoretical analysis.
Wiley.
[168] Luce, R. D., Suppes, P. (1965) Preference, Utility, and Subjective Prob-
ability. Handbook of mathematical psychology 3 (171), 249-410.
[169] Lux, T. (2008) The Markov-Switching Multifractal Model of Asset Re-
turns, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 26 (2),194-210.
[170] Lux, T. (2009) Stochastic Behavioral Asset-Pricing Models and the
Stylized Facts, Handbook of ﬁnancial markets: dynamics and evolution,
Chapter 3, North-Holland, Elsevier.
[171] Lux, T. and M. Marchesi (1999) Scaling and criticality in a stochastic
multi-agent model of ﬁnancial market, Nature 397, 498-500.
[172] Lux, T., and M. Marchesi (2000) Volatility clustering in ﬁnancial mar-
kets: A microsimulation of interacting agents, International Journal of
Theoretical and Applied Finance 3, 675-702.
64


--- Page 65 ---
[173] Lux, T. and D. Sornette (2002) On Rational Bubbles and Fat Tails,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Part 1, vol. 34, No. 3, 589-610.
[174] MacKenzie, D. (2006) An Engine, not a Camera (How ﬁnancial mod-
els shape markets) (the MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachussets, London,
England).
[175] MacKinzie, D. (2002) The Science of Surprise, Discover Magazine 23
(2), 59-63 (February).
[176] Malcai, O., O. Biham, O., P. Richmond and S. Solomon (2002) The-
oretical analysis and simulations of the generalized Lotka-Volterra model,
Physical Review E, 66, 3, 31102.
[177] Malevergne, Y., V.F. Pisarenko and D. Sornette (2005) Empirical Dis-
tributions of Log-Returns: between the Stretched Exponential and the
Power Law? Quantitative Finance 5 (4), 379-401.
[178] Malevergne, Y., V. Pisarenko and D. Sornette (2011) Testing the
Pareto against the lognormal distributions with the uniformly most pow-
erful unbiased test applied to the distribution of cities, Physical Review E
83, 036111.
[179] Malevergne, Y., A. Saichev and D. Sornette (2013) Zipfs law and max-
imum sustainable growth, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37
(6), 1195-1212.
[180] Malevergne, Y. and D. Sornette (2001) Multi-dimensional Rational
Bubbles and fat tails, Quantitative Finance 1, 533541.
[181] Malevergne, Y. and D. Sornette (2006) Extreme Financial Risks (From
Dependence to Risk Management) (Springer, Heidelberg).
[182] Malkiel, B.G. (2012) A Random Walk Down Wall Street: The Time-
Tested Strategy for Successful Investing, Tenth Edition, W. W. Norton &
Company.
[183] Mandelbrot, B.B. (1963) The variation of certain speculative prices, J.
Business 36, 394-419.
[184] Mandelbrot, B.B. (1982) The fractal Geometry of Nature (W.H. Free-
man, San Francisco).
[185] Mandelbrot, B.B. (1997) Fractals and Scaling in Finance: Discontinu-
ity, Concentration, Risk (Springer, New York).
65


--- Page 66 ---
[186] Mandelbrot, B.B., A. Fisher and L. Calvet (1997) A Multifractal Model
of Asset Returns, Cowles Foundation Discussion Papers 1164, Cowles
Foundation, Yale University.
[187] Mantegna, R. N. and H.E. Stanley (1995) Scaling behavior in the dy-
namics of an economic index, Nature 376, 46-49.
[188] Mantegna, R. and Stanley, H. E. (1999) An Introduction to Econo-
physics: Correlations and Complexity in Finance (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, U.K. and New York).
[189] Markowitz, H. (1952) Portfolio Selection, The Journal of Finance 7 (1),
77-91.
[190] Marsili, M., Challet, D. and Zecchina, R. (2000) Exact solution of a
modiﬁed El Farol’s bar problem. Physica A 280 (3/4), 522-553.
[191] McCoy, B. M. and T. T. Wu (1973) The Two-Dimensional Ising Model,
Havard University Press (Cambridge, Mass.).
[192] McFadden, D. (1974) Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice
Behavior, In: Zarembka, P. (Ed.), Frontiers in econometrics. Academic
Press, New York, pp. 105-142.
[193] Meister, K., M. Balmer, F. Ciari, A. Horni, M. Rieser, R.A. Waraich
and K.W. Axhausen (2010) Large-scale agent-based travel demand opti-
mization applied to Switzerland, including mode choice. paper presented at
the 12th World Conference on Transportation Research, Lisbon, July 2010
(http://www.ivt.ethz.ch/vpl/publications/reports/ab625.pdf).
[194] Merton, R. (1973) Theory of Rational Option Pricing, Bell Journal of
Economics and Management Science 4 (1), 141-183.
[195] M´ezard, M., G. Parisi and M. Virasoro (1987) Spin Glass Theory and
Beyond (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore).
[196] Michard, Q. and J.-P. Bouchaud (2005) Theory of collective opinion
shifts: from smooth trends to abrupt swings, Eur. Phys. J. B 47, 151-159.
[197] Milgrom, P. and N. Stokey (1982) Information, trade and common
knowledge, Journal of Economic Theory 26 (1), 17-27.
[198] Minsky, H.P. (1992) The Financial Instability Hypothesis, The Jerome
Levy Economics Institute Working Paper No. 74. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=161024.
66


--- Page 67 ---
[199] Montroll, E. W. and Badger, W. W. (1974) Introduction to Quantita-
tive Aspects of Social Phenomena, Gordon and Breach, New York.
[200] Muzy, J.F., E. Bacry and A. Kozhemyak (2006) Extreme values and
fat tails of multifractal ﬂuctuations, Phys. Rev. E 73, 066114.
[201] Muzy, J.-F., D. Sornette, J. Delour and A. Arneodo (2001) Multifractal
returns and hierarchical portfolio theory, Quantitative Finance 1, 131-148.
[202] Neelya, C.J., P.A. Wellera and J.M. Ulrich (2009) The Adaptive Mar-
kets Hypothesis: Evidence from the Foreign Exchange Market, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44 (2), 467-488.
[203] Newman, M.E.J. (2005) Power laws, Pareto distributions and Zipf’s
law, Contemporary Physics 46, 323-351.
[204] Nadal, J.-P., D. Phan, M.B. Gordon and J. Vannimenus (2005) Multi-
ple equilibria in a monopoly market with heterogeneous agents and exter-
nalities Quantitative Finance 5 (6), 557-568.
[205] Orl´ean, A. (1995) Bayesian interactions and collective dynamics of
opinion: Herd behavior and mimetic contagion, J. Econ. Behav. Org. 28,
257-274.
[206] Osborne, M.F.M. (1959) Brownian Motion in the Stock Market, Oper-
ations Research 7 (2), 145-173.
[207] Ouillon, E. Ribeiro and D. Sornette (2009) Multifractal Omori Law for
Earthquake Triggering: New Tests on the California, Japan and Worldwide
Catalogs, Geophysical Journal International 178, 215-243.
[208] Ouillon, G. and D. Sornette (2005) Magnitude-Dependent Omori
Law:
Theory and Empirical Study, J. Geophys. Res., 110, B04306,
doi:10.1029/2004JB003311.
[209] Palmer, R. G., W. B. Arthur, B. LeBaron, and P . Tayler (1994) Artiﬁ-
cial economic life: A simple model of a stockmarket, Physica D 75,264-274.
[210] Palmer, R. G., W. B. Arthur, J. H. Holland, and B. LeBaron (1999)
An artiﬁcial stock market, Artiﬁcial Life and Robotics, 3(1), 27-31.
[211] Pareto, V. (1897) Cours d’conomique Politique (Macmillan, Paris), Vol.
2.
67


--- Page 68 ---
[212] Parisi, D.R., D. Sornette, and D. Helbing (2013) Financial Price Dy-
namics vs. Pedestrian Counterﬂows: A Comparison of Statistical Stylized
Facts, Physical Review E 87, 012804.
[213] Perline, R. (2005) Strong, weak and false inverse power laws, Statistical
Science 20 (1), 68-88.
[214] Phan, D. and Gordon,M. B. and Nadal, J.-P. (2004) Social interac-
tions in economic theory: An insight from statistical mechanics, Cognitive
Economics – An Interdisciplinary Approach, Springer, Bourgine, P. and
Nadal, J.-P., eds., pp. 335-354.
[215] Poggio, T. A.W. Lo, B. LeBaron, and N.T. Chan (2001) Agent-Based
Models of Financial Markets: A Comparison with Experimental Markets
(October). MIT Sloan Working Paper No. 4195-01. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=290140.
[216] Pothos, E.M. and J.R. Busemeyer (2009) A Quantum Probability Ex-
planation for Violations of “Rational” Decision Theory, Proceedings of the
Royal Society B, 276 (1165), 2171-2178.
[217] Potters, M., R. Cont and J.-P. Bouchaud (1998) Financial markets as
adaptive systems Europhys. Lett. 41 (3), 239-244.
[218] Roehner, B.M. and D. Sornette (2000) “Thermometers” of speculative
frenzy, Eur. Phys. J. B 16, 729-739.
[219] Roehner, B.M., D. Sornette and J.V. Andersen (2004) Response Func-
tions to Critical Shocks in Social Sciences: An Empirical and Numerical
Study, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 15 (6), 809-834.
[220] Ruelle, D. (2004) Conversations on nonequilibrium physics with an
extraterrestrial, Physics Today, 57, 48-53.
[221] Saichev, A. and D. Sornette (2004) Anomalous Power Law Distribution
of Total Lifetimes of Aftershock Sequences, Phys. Rev. E 70, 046123.
[222] Saichev, A., A. Helmstetter and D. Sornette (2005) Anomalous Scaling
of Oﬀspring and Generation Numbers in Branching Processes, Pure and
Applied Geophysics 162, 1113-1134.
[223] Saichev, A., Y. Malevergne and D. Sornette (2010) Theory of Zipf’s
Law and Beyond, Series: Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical
Systems , Vol. 632, ISBN: 978-3-642-02945-5
68


--- Page 69 ---
[224] Saichev, A. and D. Sornette (2006) Power law distribution of seismic
rates: theory and data, Eur. Phys. J. B 49, 377-401.
[225] Saichev, A. and D. Sornette (2006) Generic Multifractality in Expo-
nentials of Long Memory Processes, Physical Review E 74, 011111.
[226] Saichev, A. and D. Sornette (2007) Power law distribution of seismic
rates, Tectonophysics 431, 7-13.
[227] Saichev, A. and D. Sornette (2010) Generation-by-Generation Dissec-
tion of the Response Function in Long Memory Epidemic Processes, Eu-
ropean Physical Journal B 75, 343-355.
[228] Samanidou, E, E. Zschischang, D. Stauﬀer, and T. Lux (2007) Agent-
Based Models of Financial Markets. Reports on Progress in Physics 70 (3),
409-450.
[229] Samuelson, P. A. (1965), Proof that Properly Anticipated Prices Fluc-
tuate Randomly, Industrial Management Review 7, 41-49.
[230] Samuelson, P.A. (1967) Eﬃcient portfolio selection for Pareto-L´evy
investments, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 2 (2), 107-
122.
[231] Samuelson, P. A. (1973) Proof that properly discounted present values
of assets vibrate randomly, The RAND Journal of Economics 4, 369-374.
[232] Saskia Ter, E.and R.C.J. Zwinkels (2010) Oil Price Dynamics: A Be-
havioral Finance Approach with Heterogeneous Agents, Energy Economics
32.6, 1427-1434.
[233] Satinover, J.B. and D. Sornette (2007a) Illusion of Control in a Brow-
nian Game, Physica A 386, 339-344.
[234] Satinover, J.B. and Sornette, D. (2007b) Illusion of control in Time-
Horizon Minority and Parrondo games. Eur. Phys. J. B, 2007, 60(3), 369-
384.
[235] Satinover, J.B. and D. Sornette (2009) Illusory versus Genuine Control
in Agent-Based Games, Eur. Phys. J. B 67, 357-367.
[236] Satinover, J.B. and D. Sornette (2012a) Cycles, determinism and per-
sistence in agent-based games and ﬁnancial time-series I, Quantitative Fi-
nance 12 (7), 1051-1064.
69


--- Page 70 ---
[237] Satinover, J.B. and D. Sornette (2012b) Cycles, determinism and per-
sistence in agent-based games and ﬁnancial time-series II , Quantitative
Finance 12 (7), 1065-1078.
[238] Sethna, J. P. (2006) StatisticalMechanics: Entropy, Order Parameters
and Complexity, (Oxford University Press, Oxford).
[239] Scheinkman, J.A. and M. Woodford (1994) Self-Organized Criticality
and Economic Fluctuations, The American Economic Review 84 (2), 417-
421.
[240] Schelling, T. (1971) Dynamic models of segregation. J. Math. Soc. 1
(2), 143-186
[241] Schelling, T. (1978) Micromotives and Macrobehaviour. Norton, New
York.
[242] Sharpe, W.F. (1964) A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions
of Risk, The Journal of Finance 19 (3), 425-442.
[243] Shiller, R.J. (1981) Do stock prices move too much to be justied by
subsequent changes in dividends? American Economic Review 71, 421-
436.
[244] Shiller, R.J., Market Volatility, MIT Press, Cambridge MA (1989).
[245] Shiller,
R.J.,
From
eﬃcient
market
theory
to
behavioral
ﬁ-
nance, Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 1385 (October 2002)
(http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract_id=349660)
[246] Shiller, R.J. (2003) From Eﬃcient Markets Theory to Behavioral Fi-
nance, The Journal of Economic Perspectives 17 (1), 83-104.
[247] Shiller, R.J., Irrational Exuberance, Crown Business; 2 edition (May
9, 2006).
[248] Shiozawa, Y., Y. Nakajima, H. Matsui, Y. Koyama, K. Taniguchi, F.
Hashimoto (2008) Artiﬁcial Market Experiments with the U-Mart System,
Agent-Based Social Systems, Volume 4, Series Editor: Hiroshi Deguchi,
Yokohama, Japan, Springer, Heidelberg.
[249] Sieczka, P., D. Sornette and J.A. Holyst (2011) The Lehman Brothers
Eﬀect and Bankruptcy Cascades, European Physical Journal B 82 (3-4),
257-269.
70


--- Page 71 ---
[250] Silva, A.C., R.E. Prange, and V.M. Yakovenko (2004) Exponential dis-
tribution of ﬁnancial returns at mesoscopic time lags: a new stylized fact,
Physica A 344, 227-235.
[251] Sircar, K.R. and G. Papanicolaou (1998) General Black-Scholes models
accounting for increased market volatility from hedging strategies, Applied
Mathematical Finance 5, 45-82.
[252] Solomon, S and P. Richmond (2002) Stable power laws in variable
economies; Lotka-Volterra implies Pareto-Zipf, The European Physical
Journal B 27 (2), 257-261.
[253] Sornette D. (1994) Sweeping of an instability : an alternative to self-
organized criticality to get power laws without parameter tuning, J.Phys.I
France 4, 209-221.
[254] Sornette, D. (1998a) Multiplicative processes and power laws, Phys.
Rev. E 57 (N4), 4811-4813.
[255] Sornette,
D. (1998b) Discrete scale invariance and complex di-
mensions,
Physics Reports 297 (5),
239-270. (extended version at
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/cond-mat/9707012)
[256] Sornette, D. (2000) Stock Market Speculation: Spontaneous Symmetry
Breaking of Economic Valuation, Physica A 284 (Nos. 1-4), 355-375.
[257] Sornette, D. (2003) Why Stock Markets Crash, Critical Events in Com-
plex Financial Systems (Princeton University Press).
[258] Sornette, D. (2004) Critical Phenomena in Natural Sciences, Chaos,
Fractals, Self-organization and Disorder: Concepts and Tools. 2nd ed.,
Springer Series in Synergetics, Heidelberg.
[259] Sornette, D. (2005) in Extreme Events in Nature and Society, eds Al-
beverio S, Jentsch V, Kantz H (Springer, Berlin), pp 95-119.
[260] Sornette, D. (2008) Nurturing Breakthroughs; Lessons from Complex-
ity Theory, Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination 3, 165-181.
[261] Sornette,
D. (2009) Dragon-Kings,
Black Swans and the Pre-
diction
of
Crises,
International
Journal
of
Terraspace
Science
and
Engineering
2(1),
1-18
(http://arXiv.org/abs/0907.4290)
and
(http://ssrn.com/abstract=1470006)
71


--- Page 72 ---
[262] Sornette, D. and R. Cont (1997) Convergent multiplicative processes
repelled from zero: power laws and truncated power laws, J. Phys. I France
7, 431-444.
[263] Sornette, D., A. B. Davis, K. Ide, K. R. Vixie, V. Pisarenko, and J. R.
Kamm (2007) Algorithm for Model Validation: Theory and Applications,
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 104 (16), 6562-6567.
[264] Sornette, D., F. Deschatres, T. Gilbert, and Y. Ageon (2004) Endoge-
nous Versus Exogenous Shocks in Complex Networks: an Empirical Test
Using Book Sale Ranking, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 228701.
[265] Sornette, D. and A. Helmstetter (2003) Endogeneous Versus Exoge-
neous Shocks in Systems with Memory, Physica A 318 (3-4), 577-591.
[266] Sornette, D. and A. Johansen (2001) Signiﬁcance of log-periodic pre-
cursors to ﬁnancial crashes, Quantitative Finance 1 (4), 452-471.
[267] Sornette,
D.,
Y.
Malevergne
and
J.F.
Muzy
(Febru-
ary
2003)
What
causes
craches?
Risk
16
(2),
67-71
(http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0204626).
[268] Sornette, D. and G. Ouillon (2005) Multifractal Scaling of Thermally-
Activated Rupture Processes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 038501.
[269] Sornette, D. and G. Ouillon (2012) Dragon-kings: mechanisms, statis-
tical methods and empirical evidence, Eur. Phys. J. Special Topics 205,
1-26.
[270] Sornette, D., D. Stauﬀer and H. Takayasu (2002) Market Fluctu-
ations:
multiplicative and percolation models, size eﬀects and predic-
tions, chapter 14 of the book entitled “Theories of Disaster:
Scal-
ing Laws Governing Weather,
Body,
and Stock Market Dynamics
edited by A. Bunde, J. Kropp, H.-J. Schellnhuber, Springer Verlag
(http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/cond-mat/9909439)
[271] Sornette, D., R. Woodard, W. Yan and W.-X. Zhou (2013) Clariﬁca-
tions to Questions and Criticisms on the Johansen-Ledoit-Sornette bubble
Model, Physica A 392 (19), 4417-4428.
[272] Sornette, D., R. Woodard and W.-X. Zhou (2009) The 2006-2008 Oil
Bubble: evidence of speculation, and prediction, Physica A 388, 1571-1576.
72


--- Page 73 ---
[273] Sornette, D. and W.-X. Zhou (2006a) Importance of Positive Feedbacks
and Over-conﬁdence in a Self-Fulﬁlling Ising Model of Financial Markets,
Physica A 370 (2), 704-726.
[274] Sornette, D. and W.-X. Zhou (2006b) Predictability of Large Future
Changes in major ﬁnancial indices, International Journal of Forecasting
22, 153-168.
[275] Sousa, A.O., K. Malarz, S. Galam (2005) Reshuﬄing spins with short
range interactions: When sociophysics produces physical results, Int. J.
Mod. Phys. C16, 1507-1517.
[276] Stauﬀer, D. (2005) Sociophysics simulations II: Opinion dynamics, in
“Modeling Cooperative Behavior In The Social Sciences”, AIP Conference
Proceedings, Granada, Spain, Marro, J. and Garrido, P. L. and Mu˜noz,
M. A., eds., vol. 779, pp. 56-68.
[277] Stauﬀer, D. and D. Sornette (1999) Self-Organized Percolation Model
for Stock Market Fluctuations, Physica A 271 (3-4), 496-506.
[278] Strogatz, S. (2003). Sync : the emerging science of spontaneous order
(Hyperion, ISBN 978-0-7868-6844-5. OCLC 50511177).
[279] Stanley, H.E. (1999) Scaling, universality, and renormalization: Three
pillars of modern critical phenomena, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71(2), S358-S366.
[280] Thaler, R.H. (Editor) (2005) Advances in Behavioral Finance, Vol-
ume II (Roundtable Series in Behavioral Economics), Princeton University
Press (July 25, 2005)
[281] T´oth, B., Y. Lemp´eri`ere, C. Deremble, J. de Lataillade, J. Kockelko-
ren, and J.-P. Bouchaud (2011) Anomalous Price Impact and the Critical
Nature of Liquidity in Financial Markets, Phys. Rev. X 1, 021006.
[282] Train, K. E. (2003) Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cam-
bridge University Press.
[283] Tsai, C.-Y., G. Ouillon and D. Sornette (2012) New Empirical Tests
of the Multifractal Omori Law for Taiwan, Bulletin of the Seismological
Society of America 102 (5), 2128-2138.
[284] Vikram, S.V. and S. Sinha (2011) Emergence of universal scaling in
ﬁnancial markets from mean-ﬁeld dynamics, Phys. Rev. E 83, 016101.
73


--- Page 74 ---
[285] von Neumann, J. (1955) Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Me-
chanics, Princeton University, Princeton.
[286] Weber, P. and B. Rosenow (2006) Large stock price changes: volume
or liquidity?, Quant. Finance 6 (1), 7-14.
[287] Weidlich, W. (1971) The statistical description of polarisation phenom-
ena in society. Br. J. Math. Stat. Psychol. 24, 251.
[288] Weidlich, W. (1991) Weidlich, W. (1991) Physics and social science
–the approach of synergetics, Phys. Rep. 204, 1-163.
[289] Weidlich, W. (2000) Sociodynamics: A Systematic Approach to Math-
ematical Modeling in the Social Sciences, CRC Press; 1 edition (August
1).
[290] Weidlich, W. and H. Huebner (2008) Dynamics of political opinion
formation including catastrophe theory, Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization 67, 1-26.
[291] Wiesinger, J., D. Sornette, and J. Satinover (2012) Reverse Engineer-
ing Financial Markets with Majority and Minority Games Using Genetic
Algorithms, Computational Economics 41 (4), 475-492.
[292] Wilson, K.G. (1979) Problems in physics with many scales of length,
Scientiﬁc American, August.
[293] Windrum, P., G. Fagiolo and A. Moneta (2007) Empirical Validation
of Agent-Based Models: Alternatives and Prospects, Journal of Artiﬁcial
Societies and Social Simulation 10 (2), 8-36.
[294] Wyart, M. and J.-P. Bouchaud (2007) Self-referential behavior, overre-
action and conventions in ﬁnancial markets, Journal of Economic Behavior
& Organization 63, 1-24.
[295] Xiong, W. (March 2013) Bubbles, Crises, and Heterogeneous Beliefs,
NBER Working Paper No. 18905 (http://www.nber.org/papers/w18905)
[296] Yukalov, V.I. and D. Sornette (2008) Quantum decision theory as quan-
tum theory of measurement, Physics Letters A 372, 6867-6871.
[297] Yukalov, V.I. and D. Sornette (2009a) Scheme of thinking quantum
systems, Laser Phys. Lett. 6, 833-839 (2009)
74


--- Page 75 ---
[298] Yukalov, V.I. and D. Sornette (2009b) Physics of risk and uncertainty
in quantum decision making, Eur. Phys. J.B 71, 533-548.
[299] Yukalov, V.I. and D. Sornette (2009c) Processing Information in Quan-
tum Decision Theory, Entropy 11, 1073-1120.
[300] Yukalov, V.I. and D. Sornette (2010a) Mathematical structure of quan-
tum decision theory, Advances in Complex Systems 13 (5), 659-698.
[301] Yukalov, V.I. and D. Sornette (2010b) Entanglement Production in
Quantum Decision Making, Physics of Atomic Nuclei 73 (3), 559-562.
[302] Yukalov, V.I. and D. Sornette (2011) Decision Theory with Prospect
Interference and Entanglement, Theory and Decision 70, 283-328.
[303] Yukalov, V.I. and D. Sornette (2013a) Quantum probabilities of com-
posite events in quantum measurements with multimode states, Laser
Physics 23, 105502 (14pp).
[304] Yukalov,
V.I.
and
D.
Sornette
(2013b)
Conditions
for
Quan-
tum
Interference
in
Cognitive
Sciences,
in
press
in
Topics
in
Cognitive
Science
(2013)
A
TopiCS
special
issue:
The
po-
tential
of
using
quantum
theory
to
build
models
of
cognition
(http://cognitivesciencesociety.org/journal_topics.html)
[305] Yukalov, V.I. and D. Sornette (2013c) Role of information in decision
making of social agents, Int. J. Inf. Technol. Dec. Making (submitted 8
February 2013) (http://arxiv.org/abs/1202.4918)
[306] Yukalov, V.I. and D. Sornette (2013d) Manipulating decision making
of typical agents, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics:
Systems (submitted 17 May 2013) (http://excen.gsu.edu/fur2012/)
[307] Yukalov, V.I. and D. Sornette (2013e) Self-organization in nature and
society as decision making, Adv. Complex Systems (submitted)
[308] Yukalov, V.I., D. Sornette, E.P. Yukalova (2009) Nonlinear Dynamical
Model of Regime Switching Between Conventions and Business Cycles, J.
Economic Behavior and Organization 70, 206-230..
[309] Yukalov, V.I., E.P. Yukalova and D. Sornette (2013) Mode interfer-
ence of quantum joint probabilities in multi-mode Bose-condensed systems,
Laser Phys. Lett. 10, 115502.
75


--- Page 76 ---
[310] Zhang,
Q.
(2013)
Disentangling
Financial
Mar-
kets
and
Social
Networks:
Models
and
Empirical
Tests,
PhD
thesis
at
ETH
Zurich,
25
February
2013
(http://www.er.ethz.ch/publications/PHD_QunzhiZhang_final_050213.pdf)
[311] Zhang, Y.-C. (1999) Toward a theory of marginally eﬃcient markets,
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 269 (1), 30-44.
[312] Zhou, W.-X. and D. Sornette (2006) Is There a Real-Estate Bubble in
the US? Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications 361, 297-
308.
[313] Zhou, W.-X. and D. Sornette (2007) Self-fulﬁlling Ising Model of Fi-
nancial Markets, European Physical Journal B 55, 175-181.
76
