--- Page 1 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP
AMONG THE URBAN POOR∗
PEDRO BESSONE
GAUTAM RAO
FRANK SCHILBACH
HEATHER SCHOFIELD
MATTIE TOMA
The urban poor in developing countries face challenging living environments,
which may interfere with good sleep. Using actigraphy to measure sleep objectively,
we ﬁnd that low-income adults in Chennai, India, sleep only 5.5 hours a night on
average despite spending 8 hours in bed. Their sleep is highly interrupted, with
sleep efﬁciency—sleep per time in bed—comparable to those with disorders such
as sleep apnea or insomnia. A randomized three-week treatment providing infor-
mation, encouragement, and improvements to home sleep environments increased
sleep duration by 27 minutes a night by inducing more time in bed. Contrary to
expert predictions and a large body of sleep research, increased nighttime sleep
had no detectable effects on cognition, productivity, decision making, or well being,
and led to small decreases in labor supply. In contrast, short afternoon naps at
the workplace improved an overall index of outcomes by 0.12 standard deviations,
with signiﬁcant increases in productivity, psychological well-being, and cognition,
but a decrease in work time. JEL Codes: I1, I15, D9, O12.
I. INTRODUCTION
Understanding the lives of the poor is central to modern devel-
opment economics. Economists have studied many deprivations
∗We thank the editors, four anonymous referees, and numerous seminar
audiences, colleagues, and interested readers for helpful comments and gener-
ous feedback. We are particularly grateful to Isaiah Andrews for patiently an-
swering numerous questions regarding multiple-inference corrections. We thank
Alosias A., Vivian Aluoch, Srinivas Balasubramanian, Dillon Bowen, Phoebe Cai,
Stephanie Chan-Ahuja, Fiona Chen, Thomas Escande, Juliette Finetti, Isadora
Frankenthal, Gabriel Jardanovski, Kannan Kumar, Gunjita Gupta, Erik Hausen,
Yihong Huang, Dexin Li, Andrew Locke, Madeline McKelway, Adrien Pawlik, Jo˜ao
Pugliese, Jane von Rabeau, Sangeetha Ramanathan, Cory Rand, Maya Roy, Kr-
ishna Prasad Srinivasan, Nikkil Sudharsanan, Sifan Xue, Ziqing Yan, and Yanzun
Yang for excellent research assistance. We thank Jack Cavanagh for exceptional
work reviewing project code and preparing data for publication. We thank all our
study participants and staff, all those who took the time to participate in our
expert survey, and sleep medicine experts Dr. Dinges, Dr. Basner, Dr. Redline, and
C⃝The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the President
and Fellows of Harvard College. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com
The Quarterly Journal of Economics (2021), 1887–1941. doi:10.1093/qje/qjab013.
Advance Access publication on April 8, 2021.
1887
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 2 ---
1888
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
associated with poverty, such as lack of access to nutrition, water,
education, health care, and clean air. This article considers a
previously unexamined challenge faced by the urban poor in
developing countries: sleep deprivation. People in these settings
face many barriers to a good night’s sleep, such as heat, noise,
crowding, physical discomfort, and psychological distress. Sleep
could be a crucial input to their productivity, well-being, and
cognitive function. Yet we know little about how much and how
well people in low-income countries sleep, or the returns to
policies that seek to increase sleep.
Using state-of-the-art technology to measure sleep objec-
tively, we uncover widespread sleep deprivation in Chennai, India.
Our two samples of low-income adults sleep only 5.5 hours a night
on average, far below the minimum level recommended by sleep
experts (Hirshkowitz et al. 2015; Watson et al. 2015). This is not
due to a lack of trying. People spend about eight hours a night
in bed, but their sleep is highly disrupted, with 31 awakenings
in a typical night. The implied sleep efﬁciency—time asleep per
time in bed—of 70% is much lower than objective measures from
general U.S. populations, and similar to those suffering from dis-
orders such as sleep apnea or insomnia in high-income countries
(Hedner et al. 2004; Trauer et al. 2015).
An enormous body of research, mostly conducted in sleep
labs in rich countries, documents severe negative effects of sleep
Dr. Perlis for their help and guidance on this study. We gratefully acknowledge
generous funding and support by the government of Tamil Nadu, the Abdul Latif
Jameel Poverty Action Lab, IFMR LEAD, the William F. Milton Fund, the Harvard
Global Health Institute, the Program on the Global Development of Aging, the
SHASS Research Fund, the Mind, Brain, and Behavior Interfaculty Initiative,
the Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics (ITMAT), the Weiss
Family Program Fund for Research in Development Economics, and the Pershing
Square Venture Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior. Time
devoted to the research reported in this publication was also supported by the
National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health under award
no. K01AG055691, as well as the Program for Training in Sleep, Circadian and
Respiratory Neurobiology in the Division of Sleep Medicine at Harvard Medical
School and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, which is supported by a Ruth L.
Kirschstein NRSA (T-32 grant) from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
within the National Institutes of Health. The content is solely the responsibility
of the authors and does not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the National
Institutes of Health. We received IRB approval from Harvard University, protocol
no. 14-2294, the Institute for Financial Management and Research in India, and
the Indian Council of Medical Research. The experiment was preregistered with a
pre-analysis plan on the AEA registry, no. AEARCTR-0002494.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 3 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1889
deprivation on a range of outcomes, from attention and memory to
mood and health (Banks and Dinges 2007; Lim and Dinges 2010).
While experimental evidence on the effect of increasing sleep in
ﬁeld settings is scarce,1 there is a widely held belief among re-
searchers and the public that reducing sleep deprivation would
lead to improvements in economic outcomes (Walker 2017). To doc-
ument these priors, we surveyed 119 experts from sleep science
and economics who predicted sizable economic beneﬁts, including
a 7% increase in work output, of increasing sleep by half an hour
a night from the low levels observed in our setting.
To measure the economic effects of increasing sleep in the
ﬁeld, we conducted a randomized controlled trial with 452 adults
in Chennai. We employed participants for a one-month data en-
try job with ﬂexible hours, allowing us to precisely measure pro-
ductivity and labor supply, as well as physical and psychological
well-being, cognition, and time, risk, and social preferences. Two
night sleep treatments gave participants (i) items to improve their
home-sleep environments, (ii) information and verbal encourage-
ment to increase their night sleep (the encouragement treatment),
and (iii) for a subset of participants, additional ﬁnancial incentives
to increase night sleep (the incentives treatment). These treat-
ments were cross-randomized with a nap treatment that offered
participants the opportunity for a daily half-hour afternoon nap
at their workplace.2
The night sleep treatments on average increased nighttime
sleep by 27 minutes a night (std. err. = 3 minutes), with larger
effects for the incentives (33 minutes) than for the encouragement
treatment (20 minutes). The increased sleep duration was entirely
driven by additional time in bed—on average 38 minutes a night
(std. err. = 4 minutes)—rather than higher sleep efﬁciency. These
results demonstrate that people do have substantial ability to
adjust their nighttime sleep through changes in time in bed, but
may not be able to increase their sleep efﬁciency. The low sleep
1. Notable exceptions include Avery, Giuntella, and Jiao (2019), who evaluate
commitment contracts to increase sleep among college students in the United
States and United Kingdom, and Barnes, Miller, and Bostock (2017), who study
the effects of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia on job satisfaction and
related outcomes.
2. Altogether, our design results in a control group and ﬁve treatment groups
(encouragement only, incentives only, naps only, encouragement and naps, incen-
tives and naps). In addition, all those who did not receive naps were randomized
each day to either work through the nap period or to take a mandatory break,
allowing us to compare naps against work days and break days separately.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 4 ---
1890
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
efﬁciency increases the opportunity cost of sleep: raising sleep
duration by 1 minute requires 1.4 more minutes in bed.
Similarly, the nap treatment increased daytime sleep by
about 14 minutes a day on average (std. err. = 0.3 minutes),
while slightly crowding out nighttime sleep. Although both types
of treatments increased 24-hour sleep, the 27-minute increase
from the night sleep treatments was signiﬁcantly higher than the
8-minute increase from the nap treatment (p < .01).
We ﬁrst examine the effects of each combination of treatments
on an overall summary index that aggregates all outcomes as in
Anderson (2008). Each of the night sleep treatments alone had no
signiﬁcant effect on this overall index: 0.00 standard deviations
(std. err. = 0.07) and −0.05 std. dev. (std. err. = 0.07), respec-
tively, for the encouragement only and incentives only groups. In
contrast, naps alone had a positive, marginally signiﬁcant effect
of 0.11 std. dev. (std. err. = 0.07, p = .11). Those who received
a night sleep treatment in addition to naps had very similar ef-
fects to those with naps only.3 This pattern of results suggests
that naps have an overall positive effect on outcomes, whereas
increases in night sleep do not. To increase statistical power and
streamline the discussion of effects on the individual outcomes,
we turn to an analysis that pools the two night sleep treatments
and does not allow for an interaction effect of night sleep and nap
treatments. The effects of each treatment described below should
thus be interpreted as conditional on the distribution of the other
treatment (Muralidharan, Romero, and W¨uthrich 2019).
In the pooled analysis, we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant effect of in-
creased night sleep on the overall index (−0.01 std. dev., std. err.
= 0.04), or on summary indices corresponding to four families of
outcomes: work, well-being, cognition, and economic preferences.
In fact, the pooled night sleep treatment had no signiﬁcant posi-
tive effect on any outcome other than sleep itself. It did not sig-
niﬁcantly increase productivity at the data entry job, a relatively
cognitively demanding task intended to be sensitive to sleep depri-
vation. Instead, increased sleep came at the cost of lowering labor
supply by nine minutes a day, leading to a small (but not sta-
tistically signiﬁcant) decrease in earnings. We reject the median
3. The overall effect of naps only differs signiﬁcantly from that of incentives
only (p = .02) and suggestively from that of encouragement only (p = .11). Naps
combined with the encouragement treatment had an effect of 0.13 std. dev. (std.
err. = 0.07), while naps combined with incentives had an effect of 0.09 std. dev.
(std. err. = 0.06), neither of which is signiﬁcantly different from naps only.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 5 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1891
expert prediction of a 7% increase in output (p < .001). Similarly,
we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant effects on detailed measures of physical and
psychological well-being or standard measures of cognition and
social, risk, and time preferences.
Why does increased night sleep not have beneﬁts in our set-
ting, contrary to expert predictions and a large body of lab stud-
ies? One possibility is that the large effects from lab experiments,
which typically dramatically reduce sleep for up to a few nights,
do not generalize to marginal, policy-relevant increases in sleep
in the ﬁeld. Another possibility is that the low quality of sleep
observed in our setting—as proxied by low efﬁciency and frequent
awakenings—explains the lack of beneﬁts of increased nighttime
sleep. Returns to increased sleep could be higher in typical rich-
country settings. We cannot adjudicate these reasons, but our
results highlight the importance of studying sleep in the ﬁeld,
where outcomes have real stakes and sleep is a choice variable
with opportunity costs. They also caution against extrapolating
sleep science ﬁndings across diverse contexts.
In contrast to night sleep, naps signiﬁcantly improved a range
of outcomes. The nap treatment signiﬁcantly increased the overall
summary index by 0.12 std. dev. (std. err. = 0.04, p = .00), as well
as the index variables corresponding to well-being (0.08 std. dev.,
p = .03), and cognition (0.10 std. dev., p = .08). The effect of naps
on work outcomes depends on the comparison. Compared with
taking a break, naps increased earnings—the summary variable
for the work outcomes—by 0.05 std. dev. (p = .05). However, driven
by a decrease in labor supply, naps reduced earnings compared to
working during the nap time by 0.10 std. dev. (p = .00), highlight-
ing the importance of taking into account the opportunity costs of
sleep.
Considering the individual outcome variables one by one and
adjusting for multiple comparisons, naps have signiﬁcant positive
effects on productivity (0.04 std. dev., p = .06), psychological well-
being (0.12 std. dev., p = .04), lab measures of cognitive function
(0.08 std. dev., p = .06), and attention at work (0.20 std. dev.,
p = .07).
The nap and night sleep treatments have statistically differ-
ent effects on the overall index (p = .02). We are less powered to
detect differences for the family-level indices. Point estimates are
larger for the nap treatment for well-being, cognition, and pref-
erences, but the differences are not statistically signiﬁcant. At
the level of individual outcomes, we ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 6 ---
1892
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
differences in effects only for psychological well-being (p = .04).
Estimating the per minute effects of the two types of sleep in an
instrumental variable analysis, however, we can reject equal per
minute effects of naps and nighttime sleep on the summary index
(p < .01), on the family indices for cognition (p = .08) and prefer-
ences (p = .08), and on some individual outcomes, including labor
supply (p = .04) and psychological well-being (p = .05). In every
case but labor supply, the effects are more positive for naps.
One possible reason for the different effects of the nap and
night sleep treatments is that the timing of sleep may matter.
Contrary to hypotheses and some evidence in sleep science (e.g.,
Nicholson et al. 1985; Mollicone, Van Dongen, and Dinges 2007;
Mollicone et al. 2008), naps and night sleep may simply not be
close substitutes. An alternative explanation is that sleep qual-
ity may play a role, since naps in our study occurred in a more
comfortable ofﬁce environment. We cannot separate these expla-
nations, but hope that future work in similar settings may help
answer this question.
Our article makes the following contributions. First, it con-
tributes to a better understanding of the living conditions faced by
the poor in developing countries by providing objective measures
of sleep. We discover surprisingly low levels of sleep duration and
efﬁciency among the urban poor in Chennai. These ﬁndings are
consistent with two papers measuring sleep objectively in smaller
samples in Sri Lanka and Haiti (Castro et al. 2013; Schokman
et al. 2018) and contrast with self-reported measures of sleep,
which may fail to capture the low sleep efﬁciency and its effect
on total sleep (Stranges et al. 2012; Gildner et al. 2014; Simonelli
et al. 2018).
Second, we build on a recent literature that estimates the
causal effect of sleep outside of sleep laboratories. The lack of ef-
fects of nighttime sleep we ﬁnd using a ﬁeld experiment contrasts
with an economics literature that uses natural experiments in rich
countries to demonstrate that sleep can have sizable effects on
wages (Gibson and Shrader 2018; Giuntella and Mazzonna 2019),
hospitalizations (Jin and Ziebarth 2020), accidents (Smith 2016),
and civic behaviors (Holbein, Schafer, and Dickinson 2019).4 We
4. Our ﬁndings also contrast with Jagnani (2018), who exploits variation in
sunset times in India to show that less time in bed is associated with worse
educational outcomes for children. It could be that children are further away from
optimal sleep levels, or that sleep quantity may matter more for children and for
learning outcomes.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 7 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1893
speculate that the stark difference in sleep efﬁciency in our set-
ting compared to rich-country populations contributes to this dif-
ference. It could also be that increased night sleep simply does
not have high beneﬁts at the margin in the ﬁeld, as in another
recent ﬁeld experiment (Avery, Giuntella, and Jiao 2019). Addi-
tional ﬁeld studies of sleep, including interventions that improve
sleep efﬁciency, may help reconcile these ﬁndings.
Third, we show that afternoon naps in a comfortable ofﬁce
environment have positive effects on a range of outcomes, includ-
ing productivity, well-being, and cognition. Naps are a common
feature of life around the world and are particularly prevalent in
tropical countries (Dinges 1992). Naps have been studied in sleep
labs, but we have little causal evidence on the effects of naps on
worker productivity and other real-world outcomes or considera-
tion of the opportunity cost of naps (Lovato and Lack 2010; Ficca
et al. 2010). Our work takes a step toward ﬁlling this gap, and
shows that naps may be an effective way to combat sleep depriva-
tion. The decline of naps as employment in developing countries
shifts toward Western schedules could therefore be costly.
Finally, recent research in behavioral and development eco-
nomics argues that people in developing countries often under-
invest in high-return investments such as preventive health,
agricultural inputs, or capital investments (Kremer, Rao, and
Schilbach 2019). At ﬁrst glance, the low levels of sleep we dis-
covered appear to tell the same story, and experts predicted sub-
stantial effects of increased sleep. Instead, our evidence suggests
that—in this context—people do not underinvest in sleep duration
given the environmental constraints that they face. The returns
to increasing night sleep in their home environments are low and
possibly even negative. To paraphrase Schultz (1964), low-income
people in Chennai may be poor but efﬁciently tired.
II. MEASURING SLEEP IN CHENNAI
II.A. Measuring Sleep Outside the Lab
The gold standard for objectively measuring sleep in labs
is polysomnography (PSG), by recording brain waves, blood
oxygen levels, eye movements, and body movements to determine
sleep/wake cycles and stages of sleep (Marino et al. 2013).
Although highly accurate, this bulky technology is impractical
for ﬁeld studies and may interfere with natural sleep patterns
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 8 ---
1894
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
at people’s homes, thus making measuring sleep outside of
sleep labs challenging. Self-reported measures are unreliable
and correlate only moderately with objective measures because
people tend to report time in bed rather than hours asleep,
leading to overreporting of sleep duration (Lauderdale et al. 2008;
Schokman et al. 2018).
Actigraphs,
which
resemble
wristwatches
and
infer
sleep/wake states from body movement, recently emerged as a vi-
able alternative for ﬁeld studies. These devices allow researchers
to objectively measure sleep in participants’ home environments
without interfering with sleep, as these devices are portable, com-
fortable, and unobtrusive. Validation studies show that actigraphs
reliably measure sleep duration. Comparisons between actigra-
phy and PSG measures show high degrees of accuracy in sleep-
wake detection, with 90% minute-by-minute agreement between
the two (Sadeh et al. 1995; Marino et al. 2013). Actigraphs have
been found to provide valid and clinically useful measures of sleep
duration even among people with sleep disorders (Kushida et al.
2001; Smith et al. 2018) and reliably capture treatment effects of
various interventions on sleep (Sadeh 2011).
Actigraphs also measure sleep efﬁciency, deﬁned as time
asleep divided by time in bed. This measure is available since—in
addition to number of hours asleep—actigraphs also detect when
an individual is in bed but not asleep. Sleep efﬁciency is perhaps
the most commonly used proxy for sleep quality in sleep science
(Ohayon et al. 2017). Disruptions to sleep, such as brief awak-
enings during the night, drive down sleep efﬁciency. In addition,
sleep efﬁciency affects the opportunity cost of sleep, since it indi-
cates the time in bed needed to achieve an hour of actual sleep.
II.B. Sleep Deprivation around the World
While sleep scientists recommend seven to nine hours of sleep
a night (Hirshkowitz et al. 2015; Watson et al. 2015), numer-
ous studies show that people in high-income countries sleep less
than this (Walker 2017).5 For instance, Lauderdale et al. (2008)
measure sleep via actigraphy among a large, diverse population
of healthy young adults in Chicago, and report an average sleep
duration of 6.1 hours a night, well below the recommended range.
5. This guideline refers to actual time asleep, not merely time in bed. However,
sleep and time in bed are often similar in healthy rich-country populations with
high sleep efﬁciency (Cespedes et al. 2016; Jackson et al. 2018).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 9 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1895
In contrast, there is scant evidence on sleep patterns in devel-
oping countries. Sleep deprivation may be widespread and even
more severe in the rapidly growing cities of the developing world,
where residential structures are often of low quality and people
are exposed to excessive heat, noise, crowding, and pollution—all
conditions likely to hinder sleep. Even self-reports—which typi-
cally overestimate sleep—suggest a substantial share of people
in developing countries sleep less than the recommended seven
to nine hours. For example, the 4,500 rural, older Indian adults
surveyed in Gildner et al. (2014) self-report 7.1 hours of sleep on
average, with about 30% of these individuals reporting 6 or fewer
hours a night (Selvamani et al. 2018).
Two recent studies in low-income countries measured sleep
using actigraphs and identify signiﬁcant fractions of the popu-
lation as sleep deprived. In particular, Schokman et al. (2018)
ﬁnds an average of only six hours a night among 175 adults from
urban Sri Lanka. Knutson (2014) ﬁnds that 58 adults in Haiti
sleep on average seven hours a night in a rural population without
electricity.
II.C. Sleep(less) in Chennai
Our ﬁrst measure of sleep in Chennai comes from the RCT
sample of 452 adults recruited for a full-time data entry job for
one month. To capture reliable and objective measures of sleep
beyond self-reports, all participants wore actigraphs continuously
throughout the study.6 Below, we describe sleep during the base-
line period (before treatment) in this sample. We then report very
similar patterns of sleep in a broader sample in Chennai, which
wore actigraphs for three nights.
1. A Typical Night in Chennai.
We ﬁrst provide an example
to highlight key features of participants’ sleep patterns. Figure I,
Panel A illustrates a typical night for a study participant, using
minute-by-minute actigraph measures of sleep (light gray) and
wake (dark red) status. This night closely matches the average
6. Section III provides details on the sample and study design. Participants
received a modest daily incentive of Rs. 10 to wear the actigraph, which they
forfeited if they removed it. To determine whether the participants wore the devices
continuously, a small breakable strap was put through the watch band and checked
daily. Compliance rates were high across all groups, with approximately 6% of
participants removing the device on any given day.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 10 ---
1896
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
(A)
(B)
FIGURE I
Typical Sleep in Chennai
This ﬁgure represents actigraph-measured sleep-wake patterns of two particular
nights of two selected study participants. Light gray areas indicate one-minute
periods in which the participant was asleep, and dark red areas (color version
available online) indicate periods in which the participant was awake according to
the actigraph. The gray dashed lines indicate when the participant got into or out
of bed. In Panel A we show a typical night in our sample, represented by average
levels of time in bed, time asleep, and sleep efﬁciency. During this particular
night, the participant stayed in bed for 7 hours, 45 minutes but slept for only
5 hours, 20 minutes, resulting in a sleep efﬁciency of 69%, corresponding to the
41st, 40th, and 43rd percentile of the control group, respectively. The participant
awoke 31 times during this night, and the longest sleep episode lasted 45 minutes.
Panel B depicts a good night of sleep, with sleep patterns similar to those found
in the United States and other rich countries: the participant stayed in bed for
7 hours, 53 minutes and slept for 7 hours, 8 minutes, resulting in a sleep efﬁciency
of 90%, corresponding to the 46th, 91st, and 99th percentile of the control group,
respectively. In this night, the participant only awoke nine times, and the longest
sleep episode lasted 223 minutes.
time in bed, sleep duration, and sleep efﬁciency in the RCT sample.
The participant spends about 8 hours in bed during this night
but only achieves 5.6 hours of highly fragmented and interrupted
sleep, involving over 30 awakenings. For comparison, we show
a less interrupted night with 90% efﬁciency in Figure I, Panel
B. While this night is unusual in Chennai—only 1% of nights
in our sample feature such high sleep—it resembles nights of
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 11 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1897
healthy adults in high-income countries who typically enjoy sleep
efﬁciency of 85%–95% (Cole et al. 1992; Carrier et al. 2001; Walker
2017).
2. Time in Bed versus Time Asleep.
The RCT sample spends
roughly eight hours a night in bed before treatment begins, with
strong congruence between actigraph measures (Figure II, Panel
A) and self-reports (Figure II, Panel B). Time in bed in Chennai is
quite similar to that found in U.S. samples.7 Despite this signif-
icant time in bed, study participants only enjoy 5.6 hours asleep
per night (Table I and Figure II, Panel C), signiﬁcantly below time
in bed and the recommended seven to nine hours. Ninety-ﬁve per-
cent of participants slept less than seven hours a night, and 71%
slept less than six hours a night on average. In high-income coun-
tries, such low average time asleep is typical in populations with
disorders such as sleep apnea (Cole et al. 1992; Kushida et al.
2001; Gershon et al. 2012).
3. Sleep Efﬁciency.
Average sleep efﬁciency in our sample is
70% (Figure II, Panel E), far below recommended levels by sleep
scientists who found that a minimum of 85% is needed to indicate
“high-quality” sleep (Ohayon et al. 2017). Like sleep duration,
sleep efﬁciency is much lower than typically found in high-income
countries, and instead resembles U.S.-based patients suffering
from sleep disorders such as sleep apnea (Roure et al. 2008) or
insomnia (Trauer et al. 2015). Sleep efﬁciency is low throughout
the night, remaining around 70% between 1 to 5 a.m. (when almost
everyone is in bed), consistent with interrupted sleep throughout
the night (Online Appendix Figure A.I). Participants experience
about 32 awakenings on an average night (Table I, column (1)),
again comparable to insomniacs in the United States (Lichstein
et al. 2006).8
4. Barriers to Sleep.
Why is sleep so inefﬁcient? Survey re-
sponses highlight the importance of mental and physical distress
7. Cespedes et al. (2016) reports an average of 7.8 hours in bed. Among older
participants, Jackson et al. (2018) and Kurina et al. (2015) ﬁnd 7.2 and 8.4 hours
in bed, respectively.
8. An awakening is deﬁned as a disruption lasting at least 30 seconds. Con-
sidering longer awakenings that last for at least ﬁve minutes each, we still ﬁnd
an average of 10 such awakenings a night, compared with expert guidelines of 4
or fewer per night (Ohayon et al. 2017).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 12 ---
1898
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
(A)
(C)
(E)
(F)
(D)
(B)
FIGURE II
Baseline Distributions of Sleep-Related Variables (RCT Sample)
This ﬁgure shows the distribution of the sleep-related variables averaged at
the participant-level over the baseline period (seven nights) in the RCT sample
(N = 452). The left three panels show distributions of actigraph-measured sleep
patterns and the right three panels show the corresponding distributions based
on self-reports. Panels A and B show hours in bed as measured by actigraphy and
by self-reports, respectively. Panels C and D show night sleep duration in hours
as measured by actigraphy and by self-reports, respectively. Panels E and F show
sleep efﬁciency (night sleep duration/time in bed) as measured by actigraphy and
by self-reports, respectively.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 13 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1899
TABLE I
SLEEP STATISTICS IN TWO SAMPLES IN CHENNAI
RCT sample
Broader sample
(pretreatment)
(1)
(2)
Panel A: Night sleep
Hours in bed
8.03
7.68
(0.97)
(1.23)
Hours asleep
5.58
5.46
(0.87)
(1.15)
Sleep efﬁciency
0.70
0.71
(0.08)
(0.10)
Number of awakenings
31.95
27.4
(7.95)
(10.14)
Fraction sleeping less than 7 hours
Participant-level
0.95
0.93
(0.22)
(0.26)
Participant-day-level
0.89
0.87
(0.31)
(0.33)
Fraction sleeping less than 6 hours
Participant-level
0.71
0.69
(0.46)
(0.46)
Participant-day-level
0.65
0.64
(0.48)
(0.48)
Self-reported hours asleep
7.20
6.42
(0.94)
(1.49)
Panel B: Nap sleep
Percent napping on a given day
N/A
0.25
(0.43)
Duration of naps (conditional on napping)
N/A
0.85
(0.61)
Panel C: Total sleep
Hours asleep
5.58
5.69
(0.87)
(1.15)
Participant-nights
3,080
1,367
Participants
452
439
Notes. This table presents average sleep characteristics in two samples in Chennai. Standard deviations
are in parentheses. Column (1) presents summary statistics from the RCT sample, only using data from
the seven nights in the baseline period (i.e., before any treatments were implemented). Column (2) presents
summary statistics from the three nights in our complementary sleep survey across a broader population
in Chennai (described in Online Appendix F). All outcomes are objectively measured by actigraphs unless
indicated otherwise. All means and standard deviations are at the participant level (i.e., we collapse the data
at the participant level by averaging across nights) unless indicated otherwise. The variables shown in the
table are: (i) hours in bed (per night, regardless of whether awake or asleep); (ii) hours asleep at night (per
night); (iii) sleep efﬁciency (hours asleep/hours in bed); (iv) number of awakenings per night; (v) proportion of
participants with less than seven hours of night sleep; (vi) proportion of participants with less than six hours
of night sleep; (vii) self-reported hours asleep at night; (viii) proportion of participants napping on any given
day; (ix) duration of naps (in hours) conditional on taking a nap; and (x) total hours asleep per 24 hours (the
sum of night sleep and nap sleep).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 14 ---
1900
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
(e.g., worries, stress, pain, or hunger) as well as environmental
factors (Online Appendix, Figure A.IVa). Over 50% of study partic-
ipants indicate that their sleep is disrupted by heat, noise, and/or
light, which the night sleep treatments described below were in-
tended to address.
5. Napping.
Naps are relatively common in this population.
Seventy-three percent of participants in our study reported taking
at least one nap in the week before enrolling in the study. Con-
ditional on napping, the median time reported for a nap is about
one hour. The frequency and length of naps in U.S. populations
is similar: Dinges (1992) ﬁnds that across a broad population of
U.S. adults, 61% reported napping at least once a week with an
average nap duration of 73 minutes, while in Pilcher, Michalowski,
and Carrigan (2001), 74% of healthy adults report napping during
a seven-day period.
6. Self-Reported Sleep.
Self-reports signiﬁcantly overesti-
mate time asleep, relative to the objective actigraph measures,
consistent with ﬁndings in the United States (Lauderdale et al.
2008; Avery, Giuntella, and Jiao 2019).9 Average baseline self-
reported sleep duration in our study is 7.2 hours (Figure II, Panel
D), quite similar to the average of 7.1 hours found in a representa-
tive survey of older adults in rural India described in Gildner et al.
(2014). In comparison, average self-reported sleep duration in the
United States ranges from 6.8 to 7.9 hours a night (Lauderdale
et al. 2008; Watson et al. 2015; Jackson et al. 2018).
7. Broader Population.
To investigate the representative-
ness of our RCT sample, we conducted a supplementary sleep
survey with 3,833 individuals across randomly sampled neighbor-
hoods in Chennai.10 A subset (N = 439) completed three nights
of actigraph measurements. Despite not using any of the RCT
screening criteria for this survey, the nighttime sleep duration
and efﬁciency in this broader sample are similar to that of RCT
participants, with an average of 5.5 hours of sleep a night and
9. Despite the overestimation on average, self-reports are moderately corre-
lated with actigraph measures at the individual level (r = 0.48). However, given
that self-reported levels of sleep exceed actigraph measures, self-reports also over-
estimate sleep efﬁciency relative to actigraph measures (Figure II, Panel F).
10. For more detail of the survey and population, see Online Appendix F.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 15 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1901
71% sleep efﬁciency (Table I, column (2)). As in the RCT sample,
napping is common, with 25% of participants napping on any
given day and an average duration of those naps of roughly 50
minutes.
III. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
We designed our experiment with three broad goals in mind.
First, we aimed to estimate the effects of increased sleep over a
few weeks in relatively natural sleep environments (as opposed
to depriving people of sleep in lab settings). Second, we wanted
to precisely measure labor supply, productivity, and earnings, and
thus we employed study participants full-time in a realistic but
closely controlled data entry job. Finally, to provide a broad view
of the effects of increased sleep, we collected a range of additional
outcomes, including cognition, preferences, and well-being.
Figure III provides an overview of the experimental design
and timeline of the study. Four hundred ﬁfty-two participants
worked for 28 days in an ofﬁce in Chennai, spending most of their
workdays doing paid data entry work. Enrollment took place on a
rolling basis. The ofﬁce contained computer work stations for data
entry, a break room, booths for surveys and experimental tasks,
and nap stations on a separate ﬂoor.
III.A. Interventions to Increase Sleep
For their ﬁrst eight days in the study, participants re-
mained in a control condition, allowing us to collect rich baseline
data. Then, we cross-randomized participants to two night sleep
treatments and a nap treatment, stratiﬁed by baseline sleep and
earnings.
1. Night Sleep Treatments.
Each participant was randomly
assigned to one of two night sleep treatment groups (encourage-
ment or incentives) or to a control group in equal proportions.
i. Devices + Encouragement: This treatment involved a
bundled intervention to increase night sleep. Individuals
were offered (a) information about the beneﬁts of sleep (in
particular, generic health beneﬁts) and tips to improve
their sleep (such as going to bed at the same time every
day, avoiding caffeine after 4 p.m., and avoiding screens
before bed), (b) encouragement to increase their sleep
as well as daily feedback on their night sleep duration
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 16 ---
1902
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
FIGURE III
RCT Timeline and Experimental Design
This ﬁgure presents an overview of the timeline and experimental design of the study. After eight baseline days, the 452 participants
were divided into three night sleep treatment groups: control, sleep devices + encouragement, and sleep devices + incentives. Participants
in each of these groups were further randomized into a nap group, which was allowed and encouraged to use a nap station in the ofﬁce
in the early afternoon, and a no-nap group. Participants in the no-nap group were further randomized on a daily level (i.e., within
individual) either to being allowed to work during the nap period or to take a mandatory pause during that time, with equal probability.
The nap treatment ends at day 27, and the participants return the sleep devices on day 28. Endline surveys occur on day 28 or shortly
thereafter.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 17 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1903
as measured by the actigraph, and (c) loaned devices to
improve their sleep environment. The offered devices
included eye shades, earplugs, a cot, a mattress, sheets,
pillows, and a fan (see Online Appendix Figure A.IIb).11
ii. Devices + Incentives: This group received the same bun-
dled intervention as the Devices + Encouragement group
plus ﬁnancial incentives to increase their actigraph-
measured sleep during the treatment period. Each day,
participants were paid Rs. 1 per minute of increased sleep
for up to two hours of increased sleep (Rs. 120, about
$1.70), relative to their baseline period sleep. There was
no penalty for sleeping less than in the baseline period.12
To control for any income effects due to the sleep incentive
payments, participants in the control and encouragement
groups were randomly and anonymously matched to par-
ticipants in the incentives group and received the same
stream of payments, independent of their own sleep.
iii. Control: This group did not receive any of the above treat-
ments. To deal with the concern that loaning items might
generate reciprocity effects or affect reported well-being
directly, we offered placebo household goods, unrelated to
sleep, to a subset of control participants. The total value
of these goods was roughly the same as that of the sleep
devices and included items such as small kitchen devices,
a chair, decorative ﬁgurines, and a ﬂashlight. These goods
were also returned at the end of the study.13
11. Participants were permitted to take more than one of each device, as
piloting had suggested that the devices were often shared with family members.
They were asked to return—and penalized for not returning—the devices at the
end of the study; virtually all complied.
12. One concern is that participants could game the incentives by strategically
reducing their baseline sleep. This is unlikely because participants did not know
their treatment status during the baseline period. Also consistent with a lack of
gaming, control group participants did not increase their sleep after treatment
assignment and, as described in Section II.C, baseline sleep is very similar to
levels seen in the broader sleep survey.
13. The use of placebo item offers to the control group was not randomized, and
instead began about halfway through the experiment, after which all control group
participants were offered these items. We ﬁnd no detectable difference in treatment
effects based on whether the control group had been offered these placebo goods,
and thus we pool all control participants in the analysis.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 18 ---
1904
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Given the difﬁculty of increasing sleep in the ﬁeld, we took
a bundled approach in designing our treatments, working to
increase sleep through multiple channels. Participants could re-
spond to the encouragement and incentives by spending more time
in bed or by taking steps to increase their sleep efﬁciency. The tips
to improve sleep, such as avoiding caffeine in the evening, turn-
ing off the television, or putting away one’s cellphone at night,
could plausibly increase sleep efﬁciency. Finally, the loaned de-
vices could increase sleep efﬁciency and time in bed, if the devices
made it easier to fall asleep or reduced awakenings or if they made
time spent in bed more enjoyable.
2. Nap Treatment.
Motivated by existing lab evidence that
naps can be effective in boosting cognitive function (Lovato and
Lack 2010) and can make up for limited nighttime sleep (Mollicone
et al. 2008), we cross-randomized the night sleep treatments with
a nap intervention. Starting on day 9 of the study, a random subset
of individuals were given the opportunity to take a short afternoon
nap every day between 1:30 and 2 p.m. Located in a quiet and
gender-separated part of the study ofﬁce, the 25 private nap spaces
included a bed, blanket, pillow, table fan, ear plugs, and eye shades
(see Online Appendix Figure A.IIc). The actigraphs show that
roughly 90% of study participants did sleep during their allotted
nap time. Those who did not want to nap were asked to sit quietly
or rest in their nap area; they did not have the option to work
during this time.
The remaining (no-nap) participants were randomized each
day with equal probability to either a work day, on which we
allowed them to work through the nap period, or a break day, on
which we enforced a half-hour break from data entry during the
same period. Break day participants were allowed to engage in
any leisure activity they chose, including sitting in a comfortable
ofﬁce break room. By comparing nap and break participants, we
isolate the effect of a nap relative to a break of the same length. By
instead comparing the nap and work participants, we can estimate
the net effect of naps on work output, including the lost work time.
III.B. Outcome Measures
Sleep and work are the two key sets of outcomes of this study.
We measured each of them daily using actigraphs and the data
entry platform, respectively. Study participants also completed
a series of short surveys and experimental tasks throughout the
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 19 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1905
study (see Online Appendix Table A.III). Described in greater
detail in Online Appendix C, these measures fall into three broad
categories: (i) physical and psychological well-being, (ii) cognition,
and (iii) economic preferences.
1. Measures of Sleep.
We measure night and nap sleep—sleep
duration, time in bed, efﬁciency, and interruptions—using acti-
graphs, as described in Section II.A. Ninety-four percent of partici-
pants wore their actigraph on any given day, balanced across treat-
ments. We complement these measures with daily self-reports of
time in bed, time asleep, and number of awakenings during the
night.
2. Work-Related Outcomes.
Participants were engaged each
day in data entry work. We designed a software interface that
presented participants with images containing alphanumeric text
and asked them to transcribe the data by typing into text boxes
(see Online Appendix Figure A.III). The task was designed to
mimic a real-world data entry job.14 Participants were paid for
time spent typing as well as the amount of data entered, as
described below. This design allows us to precisely measure la-
bor supply, productivity, and earnings.
Labor Supply. Our preregistered measure of labor supply is
the active typing time as automatically measured by the data en-
try software. As in many workplaces, participants were not forced
to arrive or leave the ofﬁce at precise times. On most days, partici-
pants could arrive or depart from the ofﬁce as they chose between
9:30 a.m. and 8 p.m. When in the ofﬁce, participants could take
breaks from work. We can precisely measure even short breaks: if
a participant spent two consecutive minutes without typing, the
software automatically paused and the break period did not count
toward the labor-supply measure. Thus, participants had a fair
amount of control over their labor supply, except for time slots set
aside for surveys, experimental tasks, and the lunch break.
Earnings. Earnings in the data entry work is our prereg-
istered measure of performance at work and was used as our
14. The data to be digitized were actually artiﬁcially generated. By generating
the data, we had ready access to the correct answers, allowing us to measure the
accuracy of the work easily. We were also able to vary the complexity of the data to
be entered across ﬁelds. Study participants were unaware of the artiﬁcial nature
of the data, and we believe they had no reason to not take their work seriously.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 20 ---
1906
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
summary measure of work because it combines labor supply and
productivity. It has two components: an “attendance pay” per hour
of active typing (one-third of work earnings) and a “performance
pay,” a piece rate for each correct character and a penalty per
mistake (two-thirds of data entry earnings). Each half hour, piece
rates were randomly varied between a low value (Rs. 5 per 1,000
correct characters) and high value (four times as large) with equal
probability. The penalty rate remained constant throughout at Rs.
1 per 10 mistakes. The variation in piece rates allows us to bench-
mark any productivity effects of the sleep treatments against
monetary incentives. The participants were paid daily, just be-
fore leaving the ofﬁce for the day.15
Productivity. Our preregistered measure of worker productiv-
ity is output divided by active typing hours. Output is the number
of correct entries minus (a weighted) number of mistakes. The
weight on mistakes was deﬁned as the ratio of the average piece
rate and the penalty rate.
3. Well-Being.
We collected a wide range of measures of psy-
chological and physical well-being. As preregistered, we examine
these variables both as indices and individually. The preregistered
measures of mental well-being are happiness, sense of life possibil-
ities (Cantril Scale), life satisfaction, stress, and depression. The
measures of physical well-being are performance in a stationary
biking task, reported days of illness, self-reported pain, activities
of daily living, and blood pressure.16
4. Cognition.
Sleep scientists have documented a strong re-
lationship between sleep and cognition in numerous laboratory
studies in rich countries (Lim and Dinges 2010; Killgore 2010).
We collected (i) laboratory measures of cognitive function bor-
rowed from cognitive psychology and sleep medicine; and (ii) a
measure of attention to incentives at work embedded in the data
entry task.
15. Control group participants earned Rs. 283 ($3.80) a day on average through
their typing work (not including additional payments for surveys, experimental
tasks, and sleep incentives). For context, GDP per capita in Chennai is approxi-
mately $9 a day. The piece rate accounted for 57% of typing earnings, while the
remaining 43% was compensation for time spent typing.
16. Well-being-related outcomes were preregistered at Clinicaltrials.gov, iden-
tiﬁer: NCT03322358.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 21 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1907
Lab Measures of Cognition. Each afternoon, participants com-
pleted the Psychomotor Vigilance Task (PVT), a standard measure
of alertness and attention used in sleep medicine (Basner and
Dinges 2011). Every other day, they completed cognitive tasks
measuring memory (Corsi blocks task) and inhibitory control
(Hearts and Flowers task), described in detail in Dean, Schilbach,
and Schoﬁeld (2019) and brieﬂy in Online Appendix C.5. All cog-
nitive tasks were incentivized for performance (e.g., speed, accu-
racy).
Attention to Work Incentives. To test whether sleep affects
the ability to attend to important aspects of one’s work environ-
ment, for example, the incentives faced, we randomized the vi-
sual salience of piece rates across days starting on day 6 of the
baseline period. In the salient condition, the current piece rate
was highlighted in different colors for each rate and displayed
on the screen at all times. We consider this condition the “full-
attention” benchmark, as in Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009).
In the nonsalient condition, noticing and remembering the piece
rate was more challenging. A single muted color was used for
both piece rates, and (in the second half of the study) the rate
was only visible for the ﬁrst 15 seconds of a half-hour slot, fading
out slowly. Online Appendix Figure A.III provides screenshots
of each condition described below. The participant-level atten-
tion measure is the difference in average response to piece rate
incentives in the full-attention benchmark and in the nonsalient
condition.17
5. Preferences.
Sleep may affect preferences through its im-
pact on cognition or directly. For instance, sleep has been hypoth-
esized to play a critical role in replenishing self-control (Vohs and
Baumeister, 2016) and sleep deprivation has been correlated with
cyberloaﬁng at work (Wagner et al. 2012) and cheating (Barnes
et al. 2011). Similarly, sleep could alter the weight placed on sure
things versus gambles or on others versus the self (McKenna et al.
2007; Anderson and Dickinson 2010; Holbein, Schafer, and Dick-
inson 2019). To examine such effects we study time preference via
17.
Formally,
it
is
given
by
Ai = (Y i(H, S) −Y i(L, S)) −(Y i(H, NS) −
Y i(L, NS)), where Y i(H, S) −Y i(L, S) is the average difference of output un-
der high and low piece rates of participant i when incentives are salient, and
Y i(H, NS) −Y i(L, NS) is the same for nonsalient incentives. We residualize out-
put with respect to participant, day in study, and date ﬁxed effects.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 22 ---
1908
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
ﬁnancial savings outcomes and choices on a real-effort task, and
risk and social preferences via standard experimental economics
measures described below.
Savings. We measured savings behavior by providing partic-
ipants an opportunity to save money in a lockbox at the study
ofﬁce, as in Schilbach (2019). At the end of each work day, after
receiving their earnings, individuals had the opportunity to de-
posit or withdraw money. Participants were randomly assigned
to receive daily interest rates between 0% and 2% for any money
saved in the box.18 For participants receiving the positive interest
rate, at least, the savings account we offered was quite lucrative.
The deposits made in this account constitute our main savings
outcome.
Effort Discounting. We measured present bias using real-
effort choices, following Augenblick and Rabin (2019). Partici-
pants made decisions about how many pages to type at the end
of the day on a particular date under different piece rates. Us-
ing choices elicited both in advance and on the day of the work
itself, we structurally estimate an individual-level present bias
parameter βi, once each in the baseline and treatment periods. A
complete description of the task is in Online Appendix C.6.3.
Social and Risk Preferences. We measured risk and social
preferences via standard tasks in the behavioral economics liter-
ature. Risk aversion and loss aversion are captured via a multiple
price list elicitation similar to those in Holt and Laury (2002), and
Charness, Gneezy, and Imas (2013). Social preferences are mea-
sured via dictator, ultimatum, and trust games (Camerer 2003).
6. Realism and External Validity. Conducting the study in
the context of a month-long data entry job in a controlled environ-
ment follows Kaur, Kremer, and Mullainathan (2015) and allows
for the provision of afternoon naps and precise measurement of
the outcomes described above. However, it also comes with some
costs. First, the work environment has some unusual and artiﬁ-
cial features, such as regular surveys and laboratory measures
of cognition and preferences. Second, any labor supply responses
we ﬁnd might be muted in environments where employers more
strictly control schedules. In practice, participants tend to spend
18. The interest rates changed twice during the study. Details are provided in
Online Appendix D.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 23 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1909
about 8 hours at the ofﬁce each day, with an average arrival time
of 10:32 a.m. (std. dev. = 43 minutes) and average departure time
of 6:20 p.m. (std. dev. = 57 minutes). This is quite similar to other
jobs in our context, with long commutes and unreliable trans-
portation, such that arriving strictly at a given time is difﬁcult.
III.C. Expert Predictions
To quantify how our results compare with existing scientiﬁc
understanding, we conducted surveys of experts in sleep science
and economics to elicit their prior beliefs about the treatment
effects of the night sleep interventions included in this study
(DellaVigna, Pope, and Vivalt 2019). Participation in the survey
was solicited via emails to experts in each ﬁeld. The survey pro-
vided information on the design of the study, the magnitude of the
increase in night sleep reported in Section IV.B, and the outcome
measures described above.19 Three versions of the survey were tai-
lored to different respondents: development and labor economists;
behavioral economists; and sleep medicine experts. A total of 28
labor and development economists, 19 behavioral economists, and
77 sleep medicine experts responded to the survey. In an effort
to keep the survey short, we did not elicit predictions about the
effects of the nap treatment. All experts were provided with rele-
vant benchmarks (e.g., the elasticity of effort with respect to the
piece rate) and made predictions on labor supply and work out-
put effects. Both types of economists responded with their beliefs
about savings. Only behavioral economists were asked to predict
changes in present bias, and only sleep experts were asked to pre-
dict changes in sustained attention and physical health. The ex-
pert predictions are shown in Figure IV and in Online Appendix
Table A.IV and are discussed when presenting results. Further
details are provided in Online Appendix C.1.
III.D. Study Population and Balance Checks
We followed two strategies to recruit our study sample. First,
recruiters went to low-income neighborhoods in Chennai and
spread information about the study, advertising a one-month data
entry job. Second, past participants could refer potential new
19. The expert surveys were conducted after over half the RCT sample had
been acquired, to provide respondents with information on the achieved gains
in sleep. However, the paper had not been publicly presented or circulated with
results at that time.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 24 ---
1910
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
FIGURE IV
Expert Predictions versus RCT Results
This ﬁgure summarizes the predictions made by experts in economics and sleep
science about the expected treatment effect of our (pooled) night sleep interven-
tions. We normalize each prediction, dividing them by the control group’s standard
deviation. For comparison, we also present the actual estimated treatment effect.
The bars show the interquartile range (25th to 75th percentiles) of the predictions
for a given outcome variable. We also show the median prediction (X) and the ac-
tual point estimates (diamond) of the treatment effects. N refers to the number of
responses for each outcome variable. This number varies by outcome because dif-
ferent types of experts (e.g., sleep researchers, behavioral economists) were asked
about some different outcomes. Correct Entries refers to the number of daily cor-
rect characters in the data entry task, that is, a measure of overall output per day.
Labor Supply refers to the daily number of hours working in the typing task, that
is, time at the ofﬁce excluding voluntary and scheduled pauses. Physical Health
refers to a variable that averages (normalized) systolic and diastolic blood pres-
sure. We ﬂip the sign of this variable so a positive value means an improvement
in health (i.e., a reduction in blood pressure). Attention refers to an index pooling
inverse response times and minor lapses in the Psychomotor Vigilance Task, a
standard lab measure of attention in the sleep literature. Signs are ﬂipped such
that higher values refer to increased attention. Savings refers to the daily amount
deposited minus the amount withdrawn in the savings box during the experiment.
Present Bias refers to the present-bias parameter β. Unlike the other variables,
the predictions and point estimate refer to the reduction in present bias (increase
in β) rather than a normalized outcome, for ease of interpretation.
participants to the study. In both cases, recruiters interviewed
individuals to determine their eligibility to participate in the
study.
1. Eligibility Criteria and Selection.
Interested individuals
participated in a two-stage screening process, involving a brief
unpaid survey and a home visit to check whether the individual
met the study’s eligibility criteria: (i) being 25 to 55 years old;
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 25 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1911
(ii) ﬂuency in the local language (Tamil) and the ability to read
and write numbers; (iii) having worked fewer than ﬁve days per
week and earning an average of Rs. 700 ($10) or less per day
worked in the previous month; (iv) living in a dwelling able to
accommodate the sleep devices used in night sleep treatments
and ownership of three or fewer of the sleep devices being offered
in the study; (v) the intention to be in Chennai for the following
ﬁve weeks; and (vi) no children in the household younger than
three years.
Importantly, this recruitment and screening procedure does
not seem to select participants on average levels of sleep quantity
and efﬁciency. In Table I, we ﬁnd very similar patterns of sleep
among individuals in Chennai in the broader sleep survey, as
described in Online Appendix F.
2. Informed Consent.
All participants went through a de-
tailed informed-consent procedure including information about
the work task, other experimental measures and surveys, the
actigraphs and the randomized treatments. The speciﬁc research
hypotheses were not shared with participants to avoid demand
effects. Instead, the goal of the research was described as work to
understand the “difﬁculties underprivileged people in India face,
and how these problems affect their lives.”
3. Sample Characteristics.
Online Appendix Table A.I shows
sample characteristics. A typical study participant was about
35 years old with one or two children and 10 years of education.
Two-thirds of study participants were women. Although only 30%
of participants had prior computer experience, participants were
eager to learn and improved rapidly in their data entry speed
during the baseline period.
4. Balance Checks.
We test for baseline imbalances in de-
mographics and baseline measures of outcome variables across
the experimental conditions in Online Appendix Tables A.I and
A.II. Whether we separately consider each treatment cell (Online
Appendix Table A.I) or compare the pooled night sleep treatment
groups with the control and the nap and no-nap groups (Online
Appendix Table A.II), the treatment groups were well-balanced
across key characteristics. For each treatment arm, a joint F-test
comparing it to the control group indicated no systematic differ-
ences on observable characteristics across groups.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 26 ---
1912
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
As is expected given the large number of comparisons, a few
statistically signiﬁcant differences across treatment groups did
emerge. Most notably among those, participants in the night sleep
treatment groups were about a year younger than those in the
control group, and baseline productivity and earnings were about
3%–4% lower in the nap group than in the no-nap groups (Online
Appendix Table A.II). We control for age and for the participant-
level baseline average of the outcome variables, so these imbal-
ances should not affect our results.20
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
IV.A. Empirical Framework
Most of our empirical analyses, including all work-related
outcomes, estimate treatment effects on outcomes measured
at the participant-day level using variants of the following
equation:
(1)
yitd = βTi + γ1 ¯yB
i + γ2Xit + δt + λd + εitd,
where yitd is the relevant outcome for participant i on their tth day
in the study on calendar date d. Ti is a vector of indicator variables
capturing the treatment(s) that participant i was assigned to. β
is the vector of coefﬁcients, capturing the effect of each treatment
on the outcome of interest.
Following McKenzie (2012), we control for the average base-
line value of the outcome variable ¯yB
i in all speciﬁcations, and drop
the baseline days from the regression. We also drop days on which
participants were absent, since attendance was balanced across
groups. Xit includes controls for participants’ age (quartiles) and
gender and, where speciﬁed, a dummy variable for whether a
given no-nap participant i was assigned to work through the nap
period or instead to take an enforced break on day t. This al-
lows us to estimate the effect of naps separately compared with
20. Note that we have an imbalance in earnings between the nap and no-
nap groups in spite of stratifying on a dummy variable indicating whether the
participant’s baseline earnings was above the median. For this dummy variable,
we have almost perfect balance, as expected. However, we have a few outliers with
very large baseline earnings who all happened to be assigned to the no-nap group.
Results are robust to a variety of methods to address this imbalance, including
baseline controls for this variable.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 27 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1913
working and taking a break.21 Finally, we include day-in-study
and calendar date ﬁxed effects, captured by δt and λd, respectively.
All standard errors are clustered at the participant level.
For some outcomes, such as preferences, we only have one
observation in the baseline and one in the treatment period per
participant. In those cases, we run participant-level regressions:
(2)
yi = βTi + γ1yB
i + γ2Xi + εi,
where again the outcome variable only uses the observations from
the treatment period and we control for the baseline observation
of the outcome, yB
i . The vector Xi includes the same gender and
age controls. Because these outcome measurements span multi-
ple days (e.g., present bias) or are on a ﬁxed day-in-study (e.g., the
endline survey), this speciﬁcation does not include day-in-study
or calendar-date ﬁxed effects or control for whether no-nap par-
ticipants worked or took a break.
1. Combining Outcomes into Indices. Given the large num-
ber of outcomes, we divide them into four major families: work,
well-being, cognition, and preferences. We construct a single sum-
mary outcome for each family. The work outcomes are naturally
summarized by (standardized) earnings in the data entry task,
which combines productivity and labor supply into a single quan-
tity. For the other families, we create standardized index variables
by residualizing each constituent outcome with respect to day in
study and calendar date, standardizing it by the control group’s
mean and standard deviation, and then taking a weighted average
to form the index. Following Anderson (2008), the weights are the
inverse of the covariance matrix of the residualized, standardized
outcomes. This ensures that outcomes that are highly correlated
receive less weight than outcomes that capture independent infor-
mation. Signs of outcome variables are ﬂipped when necessary, so
positive treatment effects imply an improvement in the outcome.22
21. For some outcomes, Xit includes additional outcome-speciﬁc controls. For
work-related outcomes, we control for the fraction of the day worked at high piece
rate (which was randomized each day) and the length of the work day (i.e., long
or short day, which was also randomized). Table notes specify these additional
controls.
22. This requires taking a normative stance on each variable. Some classi-
ﬁcations are relatively uncontroversial: higher productivity and earnings, lower
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 28 ---
1914
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
We also report treatment effects on an overall index, which com-
bines the four family-level summary outcomes into a single vari-
able. We use the same procedure to create the overall index.
2. Multiple-Hypothesis Testing.
We report three approaches
to dealing with multiple-hypothesis testing issues caused by ob-
serving many outcomes. Our simplest approach is to examine a
single overall index variable which combines all outcomes, as de-
scribed above. Our intermediate approach is to consider outcomes
at the level of the four families, using one summary variable for
each family, while correcting for the existence of multiple fami-
lies. Finally, at the level of the individual outcomes, we correct
for the existence of multiple outcomes within each family. In each
case, we report adjusted p-values that control the family-wise er-
ror rate—the probability of at least one false rejection—using a
step-down permutation procedure based on Westfall and Young
(1993). The adjusted p-values are displayed for the main results
in Table IV and Online Appendix Tables A.VII, A.VIII, and A.IX.23
3. Pre-Analysis Plan.
This study was preregistered on the
AEA Registry and ClinicalTrials.gov, including a pre analysis plan
(PAP). We deviate from the PAP in some instances. The main de-
viations (in our view) are the following. First, we prespeciﬁed a
regression model that included all interactions of treatments. We
soon came to realize we were not well-powered for this analysis
and that it would lead to a large number of coefﬁcients and com-
parisons that would be difﬁcult to present and interpret. We still
present the prespeciﬁed estimates in Tables II and III but comple-
ment them with a simpliﬁed but higher-powered speciﬁcation that
pools the two night sleep treatments and omits the interactions be-
tween nap and night sleep treatments in Table IV. Second, we had
not fully speciﬁed our approach to multiple-hypothesis testing and
made some changes after receiving comments and discussing with
experts. We added the overall index variable to parsimoniously
blood pressure and self-reported illness, higher cognitive function and more hap-
piness are all classiﬁed as better. We also take the (more arguable) stances that
greater patience (lower present bias), higher savings, higher labor supply, and
more prosocial behavior in lab experiments all constitute improvements.
23. More details on our multiple-comparisons corrections procedure are in
Online Appendix E. For the main estimates in Table IV, we also provide a range of
different corrections, including false-discovery rate corrections in Online Appendix
Table A.XVIII.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 29 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1915
TABLE II
TREATMENT EFFECTS ON SLEEP
Night sleep
Time in bed
Sleep efﬁciency
Nap sleep
24-Hr sleep
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Devices+Encouragement only
0.32***
0.53***
−0.54
0.00
0.33***
(0.08)
(0.09)
(0.66)
(0.00)
(0.08)
Devices+Incentives only
0.49***
0.84***
−1.14
0.00
0.49***
(0.08)
(0.09)
(0.70)
(0.00)
(0.08)
Nap only
−0.13*
−0.11
−0.72
0.25***
0.09
(0.08)
(0.09)
(0.72)
(0.01)
(0.08)
Devices+Encouragement and nap
0.21***
0.40***
−1.06
0.24***
0.42***
(0.07)
(0.08)
(0.66)
(0.01)
(0.08)
Devices+Incentives and nap
0.48***
0.58***
0.90
0.24***
0.70***
(0.08)
(0.09)
(0.68)
(0.01)
(0.08)
Control mean
5.61
8.07
69.86
0.00
5.61
Control std. dev.
1.20
1.37
11.28
0.00
1.20
Participant-nights
8,454
8,454
8,454
7,191
8,035
Participants
451
451
451
450
451
Notes. This table reports the treatment effect of the night sleep and nap interventions on sleep patterns. Each column shows the OLS estimates of equation (1) including dummies
for each treatment arm and controlling for the average baseline measure of the dependent variable (ANCOVA), age, sex, and day-in-study and date ﬁxed effects. Each row shows
coefﬁcients of treatment cells compared to the control group that receives no sleep-related treatments. Night sleep, time in bed, nap sleep, and 24-hour sleep (columns (1), (2), (4),
and (5)) are measured in hours. Sleep efﬁciency (column (3)) is the ratio of night sleep and time in bed (multiplied by 100 for clarity). 24-hour sleep is the sum of nap sleep in the
ofﬁce and night sleep. Standard errors are clustered at the participant level. Stars next to coefﬁcients reﬂect unadjusted p-values (* signiﬁcant at 10%; ** at 5%; *** at 1%).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 30 ---
1916
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE III
FULLY DISAGGREGATED TREATMENT EFFECTS OF NIGHT SLEEP AND NAP TREATMENTS
Overall
Work
Well-being
Index
Earnings
Productivity
Labor supply
Output
Index
Physical
Psychological
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Devices+Encouragement only
0.00
−0.07**
−0.02
−0.06*
−0.07**
0.13***
0.16**
0.02
(0.07)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.07)
(0.09)
Devices+Incentives only
−0.05
−0.07*
−0.02
−0.08**
−0.08**
0.05
0.08
−0.02
(0.07)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.06)
(0.09)
Nap only
0.11
−0.07
−0.01
−0.07*
−0.05
0.18***
0.16**
0.19**
(0.07)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.10)
Devices+Encouragement and nap
0.13*
−0.07*
0.04
−0.15***
−0.04
0.13***
0.11*
0.11
(0.07)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.06)
(0.09)
Devices+Incentives and nap
0.08
−0.07*
0.04
−0.17***
−0.07**
0.10**
0.11*
0.07
(0.06)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.07)
(0.09)
Participants
451
451
451
451
451
452
452
452
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 31 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1917
TABLE III
CONTINUED
Cognition
Preferences
Index
Lab tasks
Work task
Index
Time
Social
Risk
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
Devices+Encouragement only
−0.00
−0.00
0.04
−0.09
−0.05
−0.10
−0.15
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.17)
(0.06)
(0.12)
(0.09)
(0.13)
Devices+Incentives only
−0.03
0.04
−0.12
−0.04
0.11
−0.16*
−0.06
(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.19)
(0.07)
(0.12)
(0.08)
(0.13)
Nap only
0.09
0.07
0.15
−0.01
0.12
−0.09
−0.01
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.17)
(0.07)
(0.12)
(0.09)
(0.14)
Devices+Encouragement and nap
0.05
0.13*
0.03
0.09
0.23*
0.03
0.03
(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.18)
(0.07)
(0.12)
(0.10)
(0.13)
Devices+Incentives and nap
0.14**
0.09
0.32**
0.01
0.11
−0.10
0.01
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.16)
(0.07)
(0.12)
(0.09)
(0.14)
Participants
452
452
429
452
452
415
415
Notes. This table shows the treatment effects of the ﬁve fully disaggregated treatment arms on the overall index as well as the four families of outcomes: work, well-being, cognition,
and preferences. Each row shows coefﬁcients of treatment cells compared to the control group that receives no sleep-related treatments. All work-related regressions are conducted at
the participant-day level using equation (1). All other regressions are at the participant level using equation (2). The overall index (column (1)) aggregates across the four family-level
outcomes. The work outcomes include data entry earnings (the summary variable for the work family, column (2)); productivity (output per hour typing, column (3)); active typing time
(column (4)); and output (column (5)). Well-being outcomes include an overall index (column (6)) of the two broad measures of well-being: a physical well-being index (column (7)) and
a mental well-being index (column (8)), as described in Section III.B. Cognition measures include an overall index (column (9)) of two measures: lab measurements of attentiveness,
memory, and inhibitory control (column (10)); and attention to piece rates in the data entry task (column (11)). Preference measures include an index (column (12)) of three different
categories: time preferences (savings, which additionally control for the surveyor on site, and present bias, column (13)), social preferences (column (14)), and risk preferences (column
(15)). All indices are a weighted average of their components, in which the weights take into account the covariance structure of the components (Anderson 2008). All dependent
variables are normalized with respect to the control group’s mean and standard deviation. When required, outcomes are ﬂipped so that a positive value aligns with what would be
considered a “better” outcome. Standard errors in parentheses are robust to heteroscedasticity and clustered at the participant level when applicable. Stars next to coefﬁcients reﬂect
unadjusted p-values (* signiﬁcant at 10%; ** at 5%; *** at 1%). Online Appendix Table A.VII shows p-values that take into account multiple-hypothesis corrections.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 32 ---
1918
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE IV
POOLED TREATMENT EFFECTS OF NIGHT SLEEP AND NAP TREATMENTS
Overall
Work
Well-being
Index
Earnings
Productivity
Labor supply
Output
Index
Physical
Psychological
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Night sleep treatments
−0.01
−0.04
0.02
−0.08
−0.04
0.01
0.04
−0.05
(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.06)
{.79}
{.08}
{.30}
{.00}
{.05}
{.69}
{.35}
{.36}
[.30]
[.32]
[.00]
[.09]
[.97]
[.36]
[.36]
Nap treatment
0.12
−0.02
0.04
−0.09
−0.01
0.08
0.05
0.12
(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.05)
{.00}
{.23}
{.03}
{.00}
{.77}
{.01}
{.18}
{.02}
[.25]
[.06]
[.00]
[.77]
[.03]
[.19]
[.04]
Participants
451
451
451
451
451
452
452
452
Unadjusted p-value NS versus nap
{.02}
{.62}
{.49}
{.65}
{.23}
{.16}
{.83}
{.03}
FWER-corrected p-value NS versus nap
[.62]
[.66]
[.66]
[.45]
[.41]
[.84]
[.04]
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 33 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1919
TABLE IV
CONTINUED
Cognition
Preferences
Index
Lab tasks
Work task
Index
Time
Social
Risk
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
Night sleep treatments
−0.00
0.03
−0.01
−0.00
0.04
−0.04
−0.04
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.11)
(0.04)
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.08)
{.93}
{.51}
{.95}
{.95}
{.58}
{.45}
{.65}
[.98]
[.76]
[.95]
[.98]
[.64]
[.64]
[.64]
Nap treatment
0.10
0.08
0.20
0.07
0.13
0.03
0.07
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.11)
(0.04)
(0.06)
(0.05)
(0.08)
{.03}
{.03}
{.07}
{.05}
{.04}
{.52}
{.33}
[.08]
[.07]
[.07]
[.15]
[.20]
[.51]
[.51]
Participants
452
452
429
452
452
415
415
Unadjusted p-value NS versus nap
{.12}
{.31}
{.21}
{.22}
{.36}
{.30}
{.32}
FWER-corrected p-value NS versus nap
[.41]
[.31]
[.31]
[.41]
[.36]
[.36]
[.36]
Notes. This table shows treatment effects of the pooled night sleep and the nap interventions on the overall index as well as the four families of outcomes: work, well-being,
cognition, and preferences. Each row shows coefﬁcients of treatment cells compared to the control group that receives no sleep-related treatments. All work-related regressions are
conducted at the participant-day level using equation (1). All other regressions are at the participant level using equation (2). All outcome variables are the same as in Table III. In
contrast to Table III, in this table (i) we pool the Devices + Encouragement and the Devices + Incentives treatments to estimate the pooled effect of the two night sleep treatments,
and (ii) we do not include a separate indicator for the group that receives both the night sleep and nap treatments. Hence, these estimates should be interpreted as weighted averages
of treatment effects in the relevant cells. For instance, the coefﬁcient on the night sleep treatment is the average effect of being assigned to one of the two night sleep treatments
(with equal probability), in a population which either receives naps or does not (with equal probability). Below each coefﬁcient, we report (i) the corresponding standard errors in
parentheses (·), robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the participant-level when applicable, (ii) the unadjusted p-value in curly brackets {·}, and (iii) the Westfall-Young
FWER-adjusted p-value in square brackets [·], as described in more detail in Online Appendix E.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 34 ---
1920
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
FIGURE V
Impacts on Nighttime and Nap Sleep
This ﬁgure shows the average of different sleep-related variables for different
treatment arms by day in study of the RCT. All outcomes are actigraph measures.
We only include workday nights and days in the sample. In Panels A and B, we plot
hours of night sleep and hours in bed at night, respectively. Panel C shows sleep
efﬁciency (nighttime sleep/time in bed). In Panel D, we plot the duration of naps
at the workplace (in minutes), excluding day 28 because naps were not allowed on
that day.
aggregate all outcomes. We also redeﬁned the four families of out-
comes (work, well-being, cognition, and preferences rather than
work and decision making) and created a summary variable for
each family. Other deviations are detailed in Online Appendix
Section D.
IV.B. Effects on Sleep
1. Overview.
Figure V and Table II show the impacts of
our treatments on the different measures of sleep. We ﬁnd that
the two night sleep treatments quickly and substantially increase
night sleep by 27 minutes a night on average. Offering short af-
ternoon naps increases daytime sleep by 14 minutes a day. Thus,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 35 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1921
it is possible to substantially increase sleep in the sleep-deprived
population we study through encouragement, incentives, and nap
opportunities.
2. Night Sleep Treatments Only.
Both night sleep treatments
sharply increased sleep, as measured by the actigraphs. On aver-
age, individuals who received the Devices + Encouragement and
Devices + Incentives treatments only—that is, without also re-
ceiving naps—increased their time asleep at night by 19 and
29 minutes a night compared with the control group, respec-
tively (Figure V, Panel A, and Table II, column (1)). Includ-
ing those who might have additionally received naps, the night
sleep treatments increased night sleep by 27 minutes a night
on average (Online Appendix Table A.VI). This is a larger gain
than typically achieved by sleeping pills and cognitive behavioral
therapy for insomnia (Riemann and Perlis, 2009; Trauer et al.
2015).
The increase in sleep was driven entirely by additional
time in bed rather than improved sleep efﬁciency. Both night
sleep treatment groups increased their time in bed signiﬁcantly
throughout the treatment period—32 minutes for the encourage-
ment only group and 50 minutes for the incentives only group
(Figure V, Panel B, and Table II, column (2)).24 We ﬁnd no sig-
niﬁcant changes in sleep efﬁciency compared to the control group
(Figure V, Panel C, and Table II, column (3)), even in the middle
of the night when all participants are likely to be in bed (Online
Appendix Figure A.Ia).
Increasing time spent in bed is a simple and practical
way for our study participants to increase their sleep dura-
tion. However, improving sleep efﬁciency appears to be difﬁcult
for participants, even with the aid of the devices and tips sur-
rounding sleep hygiene. Participants faced substantial (implicit)
incentives for improvement. For example, a participant in the in-
centives group who improved their sleep efﬁciency from 70% to
80% would on average earn an additional Rs. 48—about 20% of
average typing earnings—in sleep incentives each night (hold-
ing ﬁxed eight hours a night in bed). Yet we saw no changes
24. On average, night sleep treatment participants went to bed 17 minutes
earlier at night and got out of bed 25 minutes later in the morning (Online
Appendix Table A.X).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 36 ---
1922
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
in sleep efﬁciency. Improving sleep efﬁciency may require more
substantial interventions, including ways to overcome barriers to
sleep—such as mosquitoes, crowding, or psychological distress—
that remained unaddressed by our treatments (Online Appendix
Figure A.IVa).
3. Nap Treatment Only.
The nap intervention was effective
at increasing participants’ daytime sleep (Figure V, Panel D, and
Table II column (4)). Nearly all participants in the nap treatment
(92%) reported falling asleep during their allotted nap time, con-
sistent with actigraph data showing that participants fell asleep
in 93% of all nap sessions. The mean actigraph-recorded (uncondi-
tional) time asleep during the nap period was 14 minutes, and the
median duration was 16 minutes (Online Appendix Figure A.IId).
The “quality” of nap sleep in the ofﬁce appears to be higher
than that of night sleep and naps at home. For instance, sleep ef-
ﬁciency during naps in the ofﬁce (85%) is higher than efﬁciency in
night sleep (66%) and in naps at home (72%, similar to night
sleep), if one excludes in all cases the time taken to ﬁrst fall
asleep.25 The average number of awakenings per minute of sleep
achieved is also lower for the ofﬁce naps. Better sleep quality dur-
ing naps in the ofﬁce—compared to both naps and night sleep at
home—is consistent with a more comfortable sleep environment
in the ofﬁce.
4. Interactions, Crowd-Out, and Heterogeneity.
We ﬁnd only
modest interactions between the sleep treatments in terms of their
effects on the various sleep measures. The effect on 24-hour sleep
of receiving the encouragement treatment and the nap treatment
together is very similar to the sum of the effects of receiving each
treatment alone (25 minutes versus 25 minutes, p = .98). The
same is largely true for providing incentives and naps together
(42 minutes versus 35 minutes, p = .32).
We do ﬁnd evidence that napping modestly crowds out night-
time sleep: those treated with naps spent seven minutes less in
bed at night and slept, on average, eight minutes less per night
25. To make these measures as comparable as possible, we calculate time in
bed for naps (both in the ofﬁce and at home) as beginning with the minute the
participant is ﬁrst detected to fall asleep. To obtain a comparable number for night
sleep, we examine sleep efﬁciency during the ﬁrst 15 minutes of night sleep, which
is the approximate length of the ofﬁce naps.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 37 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1923
(Table II, columns (1)–(2)). In contrast, the night sleep treat-
ments do not interfere with naps. Participants randomized to the
night sleep treatments did not nap any less when offered a nap
(Table II, column (4)). Both treatments increased total time asleep
in 24 hours, although naps alone had a substantially smaller and
insigniﬁcant effect (Table II, column (5)).26
Finally, the effect of the night sleep treatments on sleep quan-
tity and efﬁciency did not differ signiﬁcantly by baseline sleep
patterns, nor by characteristics such as participants’ gender, age,
or baseline earnings (Online Appendix Table A.V). Nor did these
factors predict meaningful differences in nap duration for the nap
treatment group. The treatments thus seem to have been equally
effective at increasing sleep (and leaving efﬁciency unchanged) for
different categories of participants.
IV.C. Overall Effect of Each Treatment on Outcomes
Table III presents the treatment effects for the ﬁve combina-
tions of night sleep and nap treatments. Given the large number
of outcomes and treatments, we focus on the effects on the overall
summary index (column (1)) which parsimoniously and efﬁciently
averages our outcomes.27 Each of the night sleep treatments alone
had no effect or a slightly negative (but insigniﬁcant) effect on
participants: 0.00 std. dev. (std. err. = 0.07) and −0.05 std. dev.
(std. err. = 0.07), respectively, for the encouragement only and
incentives only groups. In contrast, participants in the nap only
treatment experienced positive and marginally signiﬁcant effects
of 0.11 std. dev. (std. err. = 0.07, p = .11). The effect of naps only
differs signiﬁcantly from that of incentives only (p = .02) and sug-
gestively from that of encouragement only (p = .11). Those who
received a night sleep treatment in addition to naps had very
similar overall effects to those who received naps only: 0.13 and
26. Online Appendix Table A.VI reports estimates from the model that pools
the two night sleep treatments and does not separate the cell that receives both a
night sleep treatment and the nap treatment. These estimates are more precise,
and here the effect of naps on 24-hour sleep is signiﬁcant. Online Appendix Ta-
ble A.VI also reports Lee bounds to address imperfect compliance with wearing
actigraphs. The conclusions are largely unchanged, consistent with the fact that
that noncompliance was relatively low (6%) and balanced across treatment groups.
27. Online Appendix Table A.VII provides multiple-hypothesis adjusted p-
values for the individual outcomes in this speciﬁcation. The overall index variable
aggregates all outcomes and thus does not require multiple-hypothesis testing
corrections.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 38 ---
1924
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
0.08 std. dev. for the encouragement and nap and incentives and
nap groups respectively, compared to 0.11 std. dev. for nap only.
These results provide evidence that naps have an overall posi-
tive effect on outcomes, while increases in night sleep do not. How-
ever, since each treatment cell has only around 75 participants,
this analysis has limited statistical power. The combination of
ﬁve treatment cells with numerous outcomes also makes discus-
sion of detailed results unwieldy. We therefore turn to a simpliﬁed
but higher-powered version of this analysis, which pools the two
night sleep treatments—which typically have similar and statis-
tically indistinguishable effects —and does not include a separate
indicator for the group that receives both the night sleep and nap
treatments. The resulting estimates in Table IV should be inter-
preted as weighted averages of treatment effects in the relevant
cells. For instance, in this fully pooled speciﬁcation, the coefﬁcient
on the night sleep treatment is the average effect of being assigned
to one of the two night sleep treatments (with equal probability),
in a population which either receives naps or does not (with equal
probability). In Online Appendix Table A.VIII, we instead pool
the two night sleep treatments but include a separate indicator
for individuals who received a combination of either night sleep
treatment along with the nap treatment.
IV.D. Effect of Night Sleep Treatments
1. Overview. Experts from sleep science and economics pre-
dicted that increased night sleep would result in higher work out-
put and labor supply, improved health and attention, increased
ﬁnancial savings, and reduced present bias (Figure IV). In con-
trast to these predictions and an inﬂuential literature in sleep
science, we ﬁnd no effect of the pooled night sleep treatments on
any of these outcomes. More generally, we ﬁnd no positive effects
of the night sleep treatments on the four family-level summary
variables, or on any of the individual outcomes in our pooled speci-
ﬁcation (Figure VI and Table IV). Instead, increases in night sleep
come at the cost of signiﬁcantly reduced labor supply and there-
fore a marginally signiﬁcant reduction in work output.
2. Work Outcomes.
The night sleep treatments did not cause
signiﬁcant improvements in productivity, labor supply, output, or
earnings (Table IV, columns (2)–(5)). Although the night sleep
treatment groups were 1.3% more productive than the control
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 39 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1925
FIGURE VI
Summary of Treatment Effects
This ﬁgure summarizes the treatment effects in our study. We plot the point
estimates and 90% conﬁdence intervals for the pooled night sleep interventions in
Panel A and the nap intervention in Panel B. All outcomes are standardized, that
is, we subtract the mean and divide by the standard deviation of the individuals
receiving neither the night sleep nor the nap interventions. The coefﬁcients and
conﬁdence intervals are based on the estimates and standard errors in Table IV.
The comparison group for the nap treatment is the pooled nap control group,
that is, participants not assigned to the nap intervention. The outcome variables,
described in more detail in Section III.B, are as follows. Overall index: aggre-
gates across all the outcomes in the table. Work: (i) earnings; (ii) productivity; (iii)
active typing time; and (iv) output from the data entry task. Well-being: (i) “Well-
being Index,” a composite index of the physical and mental well-being indices; (ii)
“Physical,” a physical well-being index, a composite of performance in an endline
biking task, self-reported illnesses, self-reported pain, self-reported health, and
blood pressure; and (iii) “Psychological,” a mental well-being index, a composite
of self-reported depression, happiness, life possibility, life satisfaction, and stress.
Cognition: (i) “Cognition Index,” composite index of a lab-based and a work-based
measure of cognitive function; (ii) “Lab Tasks,” index of lab measures of attention,
memory, and inhibitory control; and (iii) “Work Task,” measure of attention to
piece rates in the data entry task. Preferences: (i) “Preferences Index,” composite
index of time, social, and risk preference indices; (ii) “Time,” index capturing time
preferences, including savings and present bias; (iii) “Social,” index representing
social preferences; and (iv) “Risk,” index representing risk preferences.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 40 ---
1926
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
group (column (3)), this difference of 0.02 std. dev. (std. err. = 0.02)
is not statistically signiﬁcant even without multiple-hypothesis
testing corrections.
The night sleep treatments reduced labor supply by approx-
imately 10 minutes a day (0.08 std. dev. with std. err. = 0.02,
Table IV, column (4)) with no change in days worked (Online
Appendix Figure A.VII). This effect on labor supply remains sig-
niﬁcant with p < .01 when correcting for multiple outcomes in
the work family. Given the additional time in bed induced by the
night sleep treatments, participants have less time available for
work and leisure, which comes at the cost of reduced labor sup-
ply. Speciﬁcally, participants arrive at work six minutes later in
the morning, take two minutes more of breaks at work, and leave
for home three minutes earlier on average (Online Appendix Ta-
ble A.X). While perhaps obvious ex post, the opportunity costs of
increasing sleep are typically neglected in the sleep literature. In-
deed, the mean expert prediction was an increase in labor supply
of 7%, which is strongly rejected by the data (p < .001).
The small increase in productivity was not enough to out-
weigh the reduction in labor supply, leading to a small and
marginally signiﬁcant decrease in earnings and output, respec-
tively (each 0.04 std. dev., std. err. = 0.02).28 This ﬁnding is again
in contrast to the mean (median) expert prediction of a 12% (7%)
increase in output. The discrepancy can be partly explained by
experts overestimating the productivity effects of increased sleep,
and partly by their mispredicting that more sleep would increase
the time allotted to work. Eighty-three percent of experts made
point predictions outside of the 95% conﬁdence interval of our
estimate of the effect on output.
Our results also contrast with those from natural experiments
studying the economic consequences of sleep. Gibson and Shrader
(2018) exploit variation in sunset times in the United States and
estimate that 8.5 minutes of additional sleep per night increases
earnings by 1.1% in the short run. Giuntella and Mazzonna (2019)
use time zone border discontinuities in the United States and ﬁnd
that 19 fewer minutes of sleep are associated with 3% lower earn-
ings. Extrapolating these estimates linearly to our experiment
would predict 3.5% and 4.3% increases in earnings, respectively,
which we ﬁrmly reject (p < .01).
28. We also do not ﬁnd any evidence that the effects of the night sleep treat-
ments become more positive as the length of treatment increases (Online Appendix
Figure A.VIa).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 41 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1927
3. Well-Being.
Increased night sleep did not signiﬁcantly im-
prove physical or psychological well-being (Table IV, columns (6)–
(8)). We ﬁnd no positive effect on the index variable that combines
the various measures of psychological well-being, in contrast to a
largely observational literature that shows associations between
self-reported sleep duration or quality and psychological well-
being (Kahneman and Krueger 2006; Hamilton et al. 2007; Zhang
et al. 2017). In fact, the point estimate is negative (−0.05 std. dev.,
std. err. = 0.06, Table IV, column (8)). The individual components
of this measure also show no signiﬁcant improvements (Online
Appendix Table A.XI).
Similarly, we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant effects of increased night
sleep on an index of physical well-being (Table IV, column (7))
that combines objective and self-reported measures of health sta-
tus. We do ﬁnd positive (not signiﬁcant) point estimates for some
of the underlying components such as performance in a cycling
task and self-reported illness, pain, and daily activity (Online
Appendix Table A.XI). Of course, three weeks is a short time for
effects on physical health and behaviors to emerge. It could be
that a longer intervention would generate health improvements
in line with the observational literature (e.g., Strine and Chap-
man 2005; Cappuccio et al. 2008; Giuntella and Mazzonna 2019).
It is also worth noting that the disaggregated analysis paints a
slightly different picture when it comes to the effects on physical
(but not psychological) well-being. Online Appendix Table A.VIII
reports that the night sleep only treatment has a positive effect
on physical well-being (0.12 std. dev., p = .06)—as does the nap
only treatment (0.16 std. dev., p = .02)—when one allows the night
sleep and nap cell to have a distinct effect. The interpretation is
that the night sleep treatments do increase physical well-being in
a population that does not receive any naps, but have no average
effect on physical well-being in a population where half the people
already take naps. Night sleep and naps thus appear to have a
negative interaction effect on physical well-being.
4. Cognition.
We ﬁnd no effects of increased night sleep on
cognition (Table IV, columns (9)–(11)). There is no signiﬁcant ef-
fect on an index of laboratory measures of attention, memory, and
inhibitory control (Table IV, column (10)), or on any of the individ-
ual outcomes, which closely mimic measures used in laboratory
studies (Online Appendix Table A.XII). A large body of sleep stud-
ies shows that inducing sleep deprivation—typically by keeping
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 42 ---
1928
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
participants up all night—substantially worsens performance on
these tasks (Lim and Dinges 2010; Killgore 2010). The more mod-
est but sustained and policy-relevant increases in sleep in our
setting do not have a corresponding positive effect.
We also ﬁnd no evidence of effects on attention measured in a
more economic domain: how much people react to salient versus
nonsalient incentives (Table IV, column (11)). Consistent with
limited attention, participants in the control group reacted 16%
less to high incentives when piece rates were nonsalient (Online
Appendix Table A.XIII). Participants in the night sleep treatments
behave quite similarly, reacting 15% less to incentives when they
were nonsalient. Increased night sleep did thus not close the gap
between responses to salient and nonsalient incentives.
5. Preferences.
Consistent with the lack of positive effects of
increased night sleep on the above outcomes, we ﬁnd no evidence
of the night sleep treatments affecting time, risk, or social prefer-
ences, or on an index combining these outcomes (Table IV, columns
(12)–(15)). We detect no signiﬁcant effect on an index of two mea-
sures of time preferences: savings and present bias (Table IV,
column (13)). The night sleep treatments did not meaningfully
affect savings behavior, leaving deposits and accumulated inter-
est unaffected (Online Appendix Table A.XIV, Panel A). Similarly,
we ﬁnd no effects on present bias estimated from effort choices.
We do detect present bias in the control group (β = 0.92, Online
Appendix Table A.XIV, Panel B). However, increased sleep does
not signiﬁcantly shift this parameter, in contrast to the view that
sleep replenishes self-control (Vohs and Baumeister, 2016).
We also ﬁnd no evidence of altered risk aversion, loss aversion,
or social preferences in standard experimental tasks (Table IV,
column (14)–(15)), in contrast to the ﬁndings of McKenna et al.
(2007), Dickinson and McElroy (2017), Anderson and Dickinson
(2010), and Holbein, Schafer, and Dickinson (2019). Although the
results are not precise enough to detect small effects, we can rule
out changes greater than 0.16 std. dev. at the 95% level for each
of these outcomes (Online Appendix Table A.XV).
6. Heterogeneity.
We do not ﬁnd signiﬁcant evidence of
heterogeneity in the effects of the night sleep treatments. Online
Appendix Table A.XVI considers effects on the overall index
variable and tests for heterogeneity by a number of baseline
covariates. Baseline night sleep duration, sleep efﬁciency, and
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 43 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1929
propensity to nap prior to the study do not interact signiﬁcantly
with the night sleep treatments. Nor do demographics such as
gender and age.29
IV.E. Effect of Naps
1. Overview.
Naps improved outcomes across a range of do-
mains (Figure VI). Table IV, column (1) reports that naps had an
economically meaningful and statistically signiﬁcant effect on the
overall summary index (0.12 std. dev., std. err. = 0.04, p < .01).
As shown in Online Appendix Table A.IX, the effect is signiﬁcant
whether naps are compared to taking enforced breaks (0.15 std.
dev., p < .01) or to working through the afternoon (0.08 std. dev.,
p = .03). Given the lack of evidence on the impacts of naps on
economically meaningful outcomes in real-world settings (Lovato
and Lack 2010; Ficca et al. 2010), this is an important result in
itself. In addition, these results serve as a proof of concept that
sleep can signiﬁcantly alter many of the outcomes we study within
a short time frame.
2. Work Outcomes.
Naps increased productivity. Participants
randomized to naps were 2.3% (0.04 std. dev., std. err. = 0.02,
p = .06) more productive on average over the day (Table IV, col-
umn (3)).30 This effect is sizable, given that productivity is quite in-
elastic: quadrupling the piece rate increased productivity by only
14%. The productivity effects of naps are similar when compared
with the break or the work counterfactuals, suggesting that the ef-
fects are due to sleep rather than merely resting (Online Appendix
Table A.IX). Online Appendix Figure A.VIII shows that the effects
are larger in the afternoon (2.7%) but also evident in the morning
(1.9%), suggesting either cumulative effects of regular napping or
that participants work harder in the morning in anticipation of
the nap.31
29. Note that this does not provide strong evidence that sleep efﬁciency and
baseline sleep duration are irrelevant for the marginal beneﬁts of increased sleep.
We have limited statistical power for heterogeneity analysis, and very few study
participants have levels of sleep duration or sleep efﬁciency typically observed in
high-income countries.
30. Online Appendix Table A.VIII reveals that the estimated positive effect of
naps on productivity in Table IV is driven by those individuals who also receive
the night sleep treatments. Naps alone, instead, have no effect on productivity.
31. The unadjusted p-values of effects in the afternoon and morning are .01
and .05, respectively. Also evident is a brief dip in productivity in the half hour
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 44 ---
1930
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
By design, nap participants could not work during the 30-
minute nap period. They could adjust their labor supply outside of
this period, say, by staying at the ofﬁce longer. We ﬁnd no evidence
of such adjustments (Table IV, column (4)): The nap group spends
almost exactly as much time typing as those in the control group
on their break days, and 26 minutes (0.20 std. dev.) fewer than
the control group on its work days (Online Appendix Table A.IX).
The effects of naps on output and earnings depend on the
comparison group (Online Appendix Table A.IX). Compared to
taking a break, naps increased total output by 0.05 std. dev. (p =
.02). Compared to working, naps instead reduced output by 0.07
std. dev. (p < .01). Earnings closely track output: naps increased
overall earnings by Rs. 11 a day (0.05 std. dev., p = .05) compared
with taking a break, a sizable increase of 4.1%. In contrast, taking
time to nap lowered earnings by Rs. 23 (8.3% or 0.10 std. dev.,
p < .01) compared to simply working through the break.32
3.
Well-Being.
Naps
signiﬁcantly
improved
well-being
(Table IV, columns (6)–(8)). The overall effect of 0.08 std. dev.
(p = .03) is driven by a 0.12 std. dev. (p = .04) improvement in
psychological well-being. The point estimates for all individual
components of psychological well-being are positive, with signiﬁ-
cant effects on happiness, life satisfaction, and sense of life possi-
bility (Online Appendix Table A.XI). The lack of signiﬁcant effects
on physical well-being is perhaps unsurprising, given the limited
effects of naps on total sleep. Moreover, physical health beneﬁts of
sleep may require more time to emerge, and some of the outcomes,
such as the cycling task, were conducted at the end of the study
on a day without naps.33
4. Cognition.
Naps boost the cognition index—which com-
bines lab measures of cognition with a measure of attention at
immediately following the nap. This is consistent with the well-documented phe-
nomenon of temporary sleep inertia after a nap (Lovato and Lack 2010).
32. The negative effect of naps on earnings (compared to work days) appears
to diminish over time. On “long” days, when participants are not restricted to
artiﬁcially short work hours, the earnings of the nap group converge with the
earnings of participants on work days by the end of the study (see Online Appendix
Figure A.VI).
33. Recall, however, that naps only had a positive effect on physical well-being
(0.16 std. dev., p = .02) when we allow the night sleep and nap cell to have a
separate effect, as reported in Online Appendix Table A.VIII.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 45 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1931
work—by 0.10 std. dev. (p = .08; Table IV column (9)). The lab
measures of cognition increase by 0.08 std. dev. (p = .07; column
(10)) on average, driven by an effect on attention (Online Appendix
Table A.XII). We ﬁnd no signiﬁcant effects on inhibitory control or
memory, in contrast to the sleep literature that tends to ﬁnd broad
effects of sleep on many aspects of cognition (Killgore 2010; Lim
and Dinges 2010). We also ﬁnd that naps increased participants’
attention to work incentives by 0.20 std. dev. (p = .07, Online
Appendix Table IV, column (11)). The nap group was nearly
fully attentive to nonsalient incentives, reacting to them about
as much as they reacted to salient incentives (Online Appendix
Table A.XIII). This result illustrates the improved attentional
resources provided by naps in a real-world work environment.
5. Preferences.
Naps have a positive but not signiﬁcant
effect (0.07 std. dev., p = .15) on the index corresponding to the
preferences family (Table IV, column (12)). In this family, we
ﬁnd a positive but insigniﬁcant effect of naps on an index of
patience (0.13 std. dev., p = .20, Table IV, column (13)). This index
combines two real-stakes measures of time preferences: savings
at the study ofﬁce and present bias in an effort-discounting task.
Naps caused a 14% increase in deposits and a 13% increase in
daily net savings (deposits minus withdrawals, Online Appendix
Table A.XIV, Panel A). These effects are sizable: randomly pro-
viding a 1 percentage point higher daily interest rate increased
deposits by 31%. The nap group earned 19% more interest over the
course of the study, although this effect is imprecisely estimated.34
Naps also reduce present bias in a real-effort task (Online
Appendix Table A.XIV, Panel B). We estimate an average present
bias parameter of β = 0.92 in the control group.35 The nap treat-
ment signiﬁcantly (unadjusted p < .05) reduces present bias to
β = 0.98, and time preferences in the nap group are statistically
indistinguishable from exponential discounting (i.e., β = 1).
34. We preregistered daily net savings as our main variable of interest. How-
ever, this measure suffers from an unanticipated design issue: participants make
large one-time withdrawals right before the study ends, which mechanically drives
down net savings. We believe deposits more accurately reﬂect differences in sav-
ings behavior, and the accrued interest captures the beneﬁt of savings.
35. The estimated β is predictive of other behaviors conceptually related to
time preference. For example, participants with a lower estimated β arrive at work
later and save less (Online Appendix Table A.XIX).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 46 ---
1932
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Naps have no signiﬁcant effects on social or risk preferences
(Table IV, columns (14)–(15)). The nap group is not more willing to
accept risk or probabilistic losses (Online Appendix Table A.XV).
The same table reports that nap participants send 0.16 std. dev.
more (std. err. = 0.10) in dictator games, but not in ultimatum or
trust games. Nor do naps affect the choices of receivers in ultima-
tum or trust games. It is worth noting, however, that the measures
of social and risk preferences were elicited in the morning, before
daily naps, while time preferences were instead measured in the
afternoon (Online Appendix Table A.III).
6. Heterogeneity.
As with the night sleep treatments, we do
not detect statistically signiﬁcant heterogeneity in the overall
effects of naps by baseline sleep or demographic characteristics
(Online Appendix Table A.XVI). Notably, those who self-reported
napping in the week prior to the study did not see higher effects
from the nap treatment. This partly alleviates concerns that the
treatment effects capture mainly the effect of reducing naps
among the control participants rather than increasing naps in
the treatment group.
IV.F. Nap versus Night Sleep Treatments
Table IV reports p-values for differences in the effects of the
night sleep and nap treatments on each outcome. We ﬁnd clear
evidence that naps and night sleep treatments have signiﬁcantly
different effects on the overall index variable that combines all
outcomes (p = .02). We are relatively underpowered to instead
compare the effects on individual outcomes. The only individual
outcome on which naps have a signiﬁcantly different effect than
the night sleep treatments is psychological well-being (p = .04).
The differences in effects on the indices of well-being, cognition,
and preferences are not signiﬁcant, although the point estimates
are larger for naps in each case. For earnings, the point estimates
for naps and night sleep treatments are similar and not signiﬁ-
cantly different.
The nap treatment has larger overall effects than the night
sleep treatment, despite causing smaller increases in total (24-
hour) sleep. Online Appendix Figure A.IX plots the overall treat-
ment effects for the ﬁve disaggregated treatments against the
increase in 24-hour sleep generated by the treatment. The ﬁg-
ure shows no evidence of a dose response to 24-hour sleep or to
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 47 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1933
night sleep: treatments with larger effects on overall sleep do not
have larger effects on the summary of downstream outcomes. In
contrast, treatment combinations involving naps have distinctly
larger effects than the ones without naps. Naps at the ofﬁce and
nighttime sleep at home are not one-for-one substitutes in our
setting, in contrast to some evidence from sleep lab experiments
(Mollicone, Van Dongen, and Dinges 2007).
To formally test for differences in the effects of nighttime sleep
and nap sleep per minute of sleep, we turn to an instrumental vari-
able (IV) analysis. Speciﬁcally, we estimate an IV regression with
duration of nighttime sleep and nap sleep as endogenous variables
and the ﬁve different combinations of treatments as instruments
(Online Appendix Table A.XVII).36 As expected given the results
above, each additional minute of nap sleep has a substantial effect
on the overall index (0.008 std. dev. per minute, or 0.46 std. dev.
per hour), signiﬁcantly different from a minute of nighttime sleep
(p < .01). However, the per minute beneﬁts of naps and nighttime
sleep also differ signiﬁcantly for the preferences (p = .08) and cog-
nition (p = .08) indices and suggestively for the well-being index
(p = .11).37 The per minute effects are also statistically different—
more positive for nap sleep—for psychological well-being (p = .05)
and the lab measures of cognition (p = .08). However, naps also
lead to larger reductions in labor supply per minute of sleep than
nighttime sleep (p = .04). Understandably, a minute of daytime
sleep crowds out more work than a minute of nighttime sleep.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Using state-of-the-art objective measurements, we document
a novel fact about sleep in India: low-income adults in Chennai
36. This analysis makes strong assumptions about the linearity of effects
(per minute of sleep) and involves exclusion restrictions. Although some of these
assumptions might be questionable, we believe Online Appendix Table A.XVII
provides valuable information on the differences in effects of the two types of
sleep.
37. The permutation-based Westfall-Young procedure we use to control the
family-wise error rate in our other tables cannot be applied to the IV setting,
since the permuted ﬁrst stage leads to a weak-instruments problem. Therefore,
we report adjusted p-values calculated using Hochberg’s step-up procedure for con-
trolling the FWER for this table. For the main intent-to-treat results in Table IV,
the Hochberg and Westfall-Young adusted p-values are essentially identical, as
reported in Online Appendix Table A.XVIII.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 48 ---
1934
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
are severely sleep-deprived by usual standards. The strikingly low
sleep duration and efﬁciency in our sample could be a widespread
but underappreciated feature of the lives of the urban poor in de-
veloping areas. Despite the lack of short-run beneﬁts from sleep-
ing more in our setting, severe sleep deprivation may have serious
long-run effects on health and well-being and calls for policy mak-
ers’ and researchers’ attention. More systematic research on sleep
in developing countries is needed to establish the external validity
of our ﬁndings and study longer-term effects.
In our setting, substantial increases in sleep duration were
achievable through more time in bed, a change that at least in
principle lies within people’s choice sets. Increasing sleep efﬁ-
ciency, however, appears to be more difﬁcult. Providing people
with tips regarding good sleep hygiene and devices to make their
sleep environment more comfortable did not increase efﬁciency;
nor did incentives to achieve more actual sleep (which substan-
tially reward higher sleep efﬁciency). As a result, increasing
sleep duration entailed signiﬁcant opportunity costs for our study
sample.
We ﬁnd no positive effects of increased night sleep on any
of our outcomes, contrasting with predictions made by sleep sci-
entists and economists and evidence from many sleep lab experi-
ments (e.g., Van Dongen et al. 2003; Lim and Dinges 2010; Killgore
2010), and a much smaller body of recent work in economics that
uses natural experiments (such as variation in sunset time) to
study the effects of sleep (Gibson and Shrader 2018; Giuntella
and Mazzonna 2019; Jagnani 2018). It is more consistent with
some recent evidence from the ﬁeld: Avery, Giuntella, and Jiao
(2019) ﬁnd only small gains in academic achievement from induc-
ing college students to increase nighttime sleep.
What explains this unexpected ﬁnding? One plausible ex-
planation is the much lower sleep quality—as proxied by sleep
efﬁciency—in our setting compared with those previously studied
in rich countries. The low-quality sleep we discovered in Chennai
may not offer the same marginal beneﬁts as the sleep typically
available in higher-income settings. A more provocative possibil-
ity is that the ﬁndings from lab studies may not generalize to the
ﬁeld, even in rich countries. The lab experiments used in sleep
science induce severe (often total) sleep deprivation (e.g., Lim and
Dinges 2010) and typically lack steep incentives to perform well
on tasks. We instead study the impacts of a more modest and
arguably policy-relevant increase in sleep on highly incentivized
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 49 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1935
outcomes. As one of the ﬁrst studies of the causal effects of sleep
in low-income settings, our experiment is not designed to adjudi-
cate these different possible explanations. It does, however, point
to the value of an economic perspective on sleep, which considers
sleep as a choice variable, and measures both the beneﬁts and the
opportunity costs of sleeping more.
Our results do not imply that more dramatic changes in sleep
environments (e.g., improved housing, noise regulations) or in
psychological factors hindering sleep (such as stress) could not
have large effects. Improving sleep quality could potentially gen-
erate more sleep (due to higher sleep efﬁciency) and greater ben-
eﬁts from each minute of sleep. Identifying interventions to im-
prove sleep efﬁciency in contexts like ours, and testing whether
increased sleep efﬁciency unlocks the beneﬁts found in sleep re-
search in rich countries, would also be valuable. It could also be
that the beneﬁts of increased night sleep manifest over longer time
horizons. Consistent with the hypothesis that increased sleep can
have meaningful effects, we ﬁnd the nap treatment has a signiﬁ-
cant positive effect on an overall index of outcomes, with positive
effects on productivity, well-being, and cognition.
The positive effect of naps is an important ﬁnding in itself.
Naps are a common feature of life around the world, and even more
so in tropical settings, where afternoon work may be less produc-
tive (Dinges 1992). Yet we know very little about the economic
costs and beneﬁts of naps in real-world settings, as concluded by
Ficca et al. (2010) in a recent review. As work in developing coun-
tries shifts from self-employment to working in ﬁrms with set
hours, naps may be crowded out. Our ﬁndings suggest that this
could be costly, because naps provide workers with beneﬁts that
night sleep does not. Large ﬁrms may be beginning to recognize
this, as evidenced by the adoption of nap policies by employers
such as Google and Nike (Walker 2017, chapter 15). Given the
forgone work time and logistical costs of offering naps, an em-
ployer’s decision to provide naps may depend on how much they
value their workers’ psychological well-being and attention in the
particular work setting.
An obvious question raised by our results is why naps were
effective when a larger increase in night sleep had no effect.
Naps and night sleep are clearly not substitutes in our setting
(Online Appendix Figure A.IX and Table A.XVII). Naps occurred
in a pleasant ofﬁce environment and may therefore have been
higher quality than night sleep. Alternatively, naps may simply
enter the production function of our outcomes differently than
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 50 ---
1936
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
marginal increases in night sleep due to their timing. Naps were
timed to coincide with the circadian dip in the mid-afternoon,
when individuals are prone to sleepiness and impaired perfor-
mance. A short burst of sleep during the circadian dip has been
shown to be particularly valuable (Takahashi 2003; Lovato and
Lack 2010).
Perhaps the broadest question our research raises is to what
extent the sizable impacts of sleep in lab studies generalize to
ﬁeld settings. Measuring sleep in the ﬁeld—made possible by
wearables—allows such experiments linking sleep to real-world
economic outcomes in a wider range of environments (Handel and
Kolstad 2017). We evaluated labor market effects of sleep in the
particular context of data entry work. Does sleep matter differ-
ently in less cognitively demanding or more physical jobs? In con-
texts where work is independent or collaborative? For children,
as in Jagnani (2018)? Are naps in usual environments equally
effective? Systematic measurement and tests across a wider
variety of environments would facilitate the estimation of the
overall impacts of sleep on the economy.
MASSCHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, UNITED STATES
HARVARD UNIVERSITY AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RE-
SEARCH, UNITED STATES
MASSASCHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL BUREAU
OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH, UNITED STATES
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA, UNITED STATES
HARVARD UNIVERSITY, UNITED STATES
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
An Online Appendix for this article can be found at The Quar-
terly Journal of Economics online.
DATA AVAILABILITY
Data and code replicating the tables and ﬁgures in this article
can be found in Bessone et al. (2021) in the Harvard Dataverse,
https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/GJ9QPC.
REFERENCES
Anderson, Clare, and David L. Dickinson, “Bargaining and Trust: The Effects of
36-h Total Sleep Deprivation on Socially Interactive Decisions,” Journal of
Sleep Research, 19 (2010), 54–63.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 51 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1937
Anderson, Michael L., “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects
of Early Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool,
and Early Training Projects,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
103 (2008), 1481–1495.
Augenblick, Ned, and Matthew Rabin, “An Experiment on Time Preference and
Misprediction in Unpleasant Tasks,” Review of Economic Studies, 86 (2019),
941–975.
Avery, Mallory, Osea Giuntella, and Peiran Jiao, “Why Don’t We Sleep Enough? A
Field Experiment among College Students,” IZA Discussion Paper no. 12772,
2019.
Banks, Siobhan, and David Dinges, “Behavioral and Physiological Conse-
quences of Sleep Restriction,” Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 3 (2007),
519–528.
Barnes, Christopher M., Jared A. Miller, and Sophie Bostock, “Helping Employees
Sleep Well: Effects of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia on Work
Outcomes,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 102 (2017), 104.
Barnes, Christopher M., John Schaubroeck, Megan Huth, and Sonia Ghumman,
“Lack of Sleep and Unethical Conduct,” Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 115 (2011), 169–180.
Basner, Mathias, and David F. Dinges, “Maximizing Sensitivity of the Psychomotor
Vigilance Test (PVT) to Sleep Loss,” Sleep, 34 (2011), 581–591.
Bessone,
Pedro,
Gautam
Rao,
Frank
Schilbach,
Heather
Schoﬁeld,
and
Mattie Toma, “Replication
Data for: ‘The Economic Consequences of
Increasing Sleep among the Urban Poor’,” (2021), Harvard Dataverse,
https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/GJ9QPC.
Camerer, Colin F., Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction
(Princeton, NJ: Russell Sage Foundation/Princeton University Press, 2003).
Cappuccio, Francesco P., Frances M. Taggart, Ngianga-Bakwin Kandala, Andrew
Currie, Ed Peile, Saverio Stranges, and Michelle A. Miller, “Meta-Analysis of
Short Sleep Duration and Obesity in Children and Adults,” Sleep, 31 (2008),
619–626.
Carrier, Julie, Stephanie Land, Daniel J. Buysse, David J. Kupfer, and Timothy H.
Monk, “The Effects of Age and Gender on Sleep EEG Power Spectral Density
in the Middle Years of Life (Ages 20–60 Years Old),” Psychophysiology, 38
(2001), 232–242.
Castro, L., D. Poyares, D. Leger, L. Bittencourt, and S. Tuﬁk, “Objective Prevalence
of Insomnia in the Sao Paulo, Brazil Epidemiologic Sleep Study,” Annals of
Neurology, 74 (2013), 537–546.
Cespedes, Elizabeth M., Frank B. Hu, Susan Redline, Bernard Rosner, Carmela
Alcantara, Jianwen Cai, Martica H Hall, Jose S. Loredo, Yasmin Mossavar-
Rahmani, and Alberto R. Ramos et al., “Comparison of Self-Reported Sleep
Duration with Actigraphy: Results from the Hispanic Community Health
Study/Study of Latinos Sue˜no Ancillary Study,” American Journal of Epi-
demiology, 183 (2016), 561–573.
Charness, Gary, Uri Gneezy, and Alex Imas, “Experimental Methods: Eliciting
Risk Preferences,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 87 (2013),
43–51.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
Evidence,” American Economic Review, 99 (2009), 1145–1177.
Cole, Roger J., Daniel F. Kripke, William Gruen, Daniel J. Mullaney, and J. Chris-
tian Gillin, “Automatic Sleep/Wake Identiﬁcation from Wrist Activity,” Sleep,
15 (1992), 461–469.
Dean, Emma, Frank Schilbach, and Heather Schoﬁeld, “Poverty and Cognitive
Function,” in The Economics of Poverty Traps. Christopher B. Barrett, Michael
R., Carter and Jean-Paul Chavas, eds. (Chicago: NBER/University of Chicago
Press, 2019), 57–118.
DellaVigna, Stefano, Devin Pope, and Eva Vivalt, “Predict Science to Improve
Science,” Science, 366 (2019), 428–429.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 52 ---
1938
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Dickinson, David L., and Todd McElroy, “Sleep Restriction and Circadian Effects
on Social Decisions,” European Economic Review, 97 (2017), 57–71.
Dinges, David F., “Adult Napping and Its Effects on Ability to Function,” Why We
Nap in Claudio Stampi, ed. (Boston: Birkh¨auser, 1992, 118–134.
Ficca, Gianluca, John Axelsson, Daniel Mollicone, Vincezo Muto, and Michael Vi-
tiello, “Naps, Cognition, and Performance,” Sleep Medicine Reviews, 14 (2010),
240–258.
Gershon, Anda, Wesley K. Thompson, Polina Eidelman, Eleanor L. McGlinchey,
Katherine A. Kaplan, and Allison G. Harvey, “Restless Pillow, Rufﬂed Mind:
Sleep and Affect Coupling in Interepisode Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of Ab-
normal Psychology, 121 (2012), 863.
Gibson, Matthew, and Jeffrey Shrader, “Time Use and Labor Productivity: The
Returns to Sleep,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 100 (2018), 783–798.
Gildner, Theresa, Melissa Liebert, Paul Kowal, Somnath Chatterji, and Josh Snod-
grass, “Associations between Sleep Duration, Sleep Quality, and Cognitive
Test Performance among Older Adults from Six Middle Income Countries:
Results from the Study on Global Ageing and Adult Heath (SAGE),” Sleep, 10
(2014), 613–621.
Giuntella, Osea, and Fabrizio Mazzonna, “Sunset Time and the Economic Effects
of Social Jetlag: Evidence from US Time Zone Borders,” Journal of Health
Economics, 65 (2019), 210–226.
Hamilton, Nancy A., C. A. Nelson, N. Stevens, and Heather Kitzman, “Sleep and
Psychological Well-Being,” Social Indicators Research, 82 (2007), 147–163.
Handel, Benjamin, and Jonathan Kolstad, “Wearable Technologies and Health
Behaviors: New Data and New Methods to Understand Population Health,”
American Economic Review, 107 (2017), 481–485.
Hedner, Jan, Giora Pillar, Stephen D. Pittman, Ding Zou, Ludger Grote, and
David P. White, “A Novel Adaptive Wrist Actigraphy Algorithm for Sleep-
Wake Assessment in Sleep Apnea Patients,” Sleep, 27 (2004), 1560–1566.
Hirshkowitz, Max, Kaitlyn Whiton, Steven M. Albert, Cathy Alessi, Oliviero Bruni,
Lydia DonCarlos, Nancy Hazen, and John Herman et al., “National Sleep
Foundation’s Sleep Time Duration Recommendations: Methodology and Re-
sults Summary,” Sleep Health, 1 (2015), 40–43.
Holbein, John B., Jerome P. Schafer, and David L. Dickinson, “Insufﬁcient Sleep
Reduces Voting and Other Prosocial Behaviours,” Nature Human Behaviour,
3 (2019), 492.
Holt, Charles A., and Susan K. Laury, “Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects,”
American Economic Review, 92 (2002), 1644–1655.
Jackson, Chandra L., Sanjay R. Patel, W. Braxton Jackson II, Pamela L. Lutsey,
and Susan Redline, “Agreement between Self-Reported and Objectively Mea-
sured Sleep Duration among White, Black, Hispanic, and Chinese Adults in
the United States: Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis,” Sleep, 41 (2018),
1–12.
Jagnani, Maulik, “Poor Sleep: Sunset Time and Human Capital Production,”
Mimeo, 2018.
Jin, Lawrence, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth, “Sleep, Health, and Human Capital: Evi-
dence from Daylight Saving Time,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organi-
zation, 170 (2020), 174–192.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Alan Krueger, “Development in the Measurement of Sub-
jective Well-Being,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20 (2006), 3–24.
Kaur, Supreet, Michael Kremer, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Self-Control at
Work,” Journal of Political Economy, 123 (2015), 1227–1277.
Killgore, William, “Effects of Sleep Deprivation on Cognition,” Progress in Brain
Research, 185 (2010), 105–129.
Knutson, Kristen L., “Sleep Duration, Quality, and Timing and Their Associations
with Age in A Community without Electricity in Haiti,” American Journal of
Human Biology, 26 (2014), 80–86.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 53 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1939
Kremer, Michael, Gautam Rao, and Frank Schilbach, “Behavioral Development
Economics,” in Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Foundation and Applica-
tions, vol. 2, B. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano Dellaigna, and David Laibson, eds.
(Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2019), 345–458.
Kurina, Lianne M., Ronald A. Thisted, Jen-Hao Chen, Martha K. McClintock,
Linda J. Waite, and Diane S. Lauderdale, “Actigraphic Sleep Characteristics
among Older Americans,” Sleep Health, 1 (2015), 285–292.
Kushida, Clete A., Arthur Chang, Chirag Gadkary, Christian Guilleminault, Os-
car Carrillo, and William C. Dement, “Comparison of Actigraphic, Polysomno-
graphic, and Subjective Assessment of Sleep Parameters in Sleep-Disordered
Patients,” Sleep Medicine, 2 (2001), 389–396.
Lauderdale, Diane S., Kristen L. Knutson, Lijing L. Yan, Kiang Liu, and Paul J.
Rathouz, “Sleep Duration: How Well Do Self-Reports Reﬂect Objective Mea-
sures? The CARDIA Sleep Study,” Epidemiology, 19 (2008), 838–845.
Lichstein, K., K. Stone, J. Donaldson, S. Nau, J. Soefﬁng, D. Murray, K. Lester, and
N. Aguillard, “Actigraphy Validation with Insomnia,” Sleep, 2 (2006), 232–239.
Lim, Julian, and David F. Dinges, “A Meta-Analysis of the Impact of Short-Term
Sleep Deprivation on Cognitive Variables,” Psychological Bulletin, 136 (2010),
375–389.
Lovato, Nicole, and Leon Lack, “The Effects of Napping on Cognitive Functioning,”
Progress in Brain Research, 185 (2010), 155–166.
Marino, Miguel, Yi Li, Michael N. Rueschman, J. W. Winkelman, J. M. Ellenbogen,
J. Solet, Hilary Dulin, Lisa F. Berkman, and Orfeu M. Buxton, “Measuring
Sleep: Accuracy, Sensitivity, and Speciﬁcity of Wrist Actigraphy Compared to
Polysomnography,” Sleep, 36 (2013), 1747–1755.
McKenna, Benjamin S., David L. Dickinson, Henry J. Orff, and Sean P. A. Drum-
mond, “The Effects of One Night of Sleep Deprivation on Known-Risk and
Ambiguous-Risk Decisions,” Journal of Sleep Research, 16 (2007), 245–252.
McKenzie, David, “Beyond Baseline and Follow-up: The Case for More T in Exper-
iments,” Journal of Development Economics, 99 (2012), 210–221.
Mollicone, D., H. Van Dongen, and D. Dinges, “Optimizing Sleep/Wake Schedules
in Space: Sleep during Chronic Nocturnal Sleep Restriction with and without
Diurnal Naps,” Acta Astronautica, 60 (2007), 354–361.
Mollicone, D., H. Van Dongen, N. Rogers, and D. Dinges, “Response Sur-
face Mapping of Neurobehavioral Performance: Testing the Feasibility of
Split-Sleep Schedules for Space Operations,” Acta Astronautica, 63 (2008),
833–840.
Muralidharan, Karthik, Mauricio Romero, and Kaspar W¨uthrich, “Factorial De-
signs, Model Selection, and (Incorrect) Inference in Randomized Experi-
ments,” NBER Working Paper no. w26562, 2019.
Nicholson, A., P. Pascoe, T. Roehrs, T. Roth, M. Spencer, and M. Stone, “Sustained
Performance with Short Evening and Morning Sleeps,” Aviation, Space, and
Environmental Medicine, 56 (1985), 105–114.
Ohayon, Maurice, Emerson M. Wickwire, Max Hirshkowitz, Steven M. Albert, Alon
Avidan, Frank J. Daly, Yves Dauvilliers, Raffaele Ferri, Constance Fung, and
David Gozal et al., “National Sleep Foundation’s Sleep Quality Recommenda-
tions: First Report,” Sleep Health, 3 (2017), 6–19.
Pilcher, J., K. Michalowski, and R. Carrigan, “The Prevalence of Daytime Napping
and its Relationship to Nighttime Sleep,” Behavioral Medicine, 27 (2001), 71–
76.
Riemann, Dieter, and Michael L. Perlis, “The Treatments of Chronic Insomnia: A
Review of Benzodiazepine Receptor Agonists and Psychological and Behav-
ioral Therapies,” Sleep Medicine Reviews, 13 (2009), 205–214.
Roure, Nuria, Silvia Gomez, Olga Mediano, Joaquin Duran, Monica de la Pe˜na,
Francisco Capote, Joaquin Teran, Juan Fernando Masa, Maria Luz Alonso,
and Jaime Corral et al., “Daytime Sleepiness and Polysomnography in
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Patients,” Sleep Medicine, 9 (2008), 727–731.
Sadeh, Avi, “The Role of Actigraphy in Sleep Medicine: An Update,” Sleep Medicine
Review, 15 (2011), 259–267.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 54 ---
1940
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Sadeh, A., P. Hauri, D. Kripke, and P. Lavie, “The Role of Actigraphy in the Eval-
uation of Sleep Disorders,” Sleep, 18 (1995), 288–302.
Schilbach, Frank, “Alcohol and Self-Control: A Field Experiment in India,” Amer-
ican Economic Review, 109 (2019), 1290–1322.
Schokman, Aaron, Yu Sun Bin, Guido Simonelli, Jonathon Pye, Richard Morris,
Athula Sumathipala, Sisira H. Siribaddana, Matthew Hotopf, Fruhling Ri-
jsdijk, and Kaushalya Jayaweera et al., “Agreement between Subjective and
Objective Measures of Sleep Duration in a Low-Middle Income Country Set-
ting,” Sleep Health, 4 (2018), 543–550.
Schultz, Theodore William, Transforming Traditional Agriculture (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1964).
Selvamani, Y., Perianayagam Arokiasamy, Mamta Chaudhary, and Himanshu,
“Association of Sleep Problems and Sleep Duration with Self-Rated Health
and Grip Strength among Older Adults in India and China: Results from the
Study on Global Aging and Adult Health (SAGE),” Journal of Public Health,
26 (2018), 697–707.
Simonelli, Guido, Nathaniel S. Marshall, Antigone Grillakis, Christopher B.
Miller, Camilla M. Hoyos, and Nick Glozier, “Sleep Health Epidemiology in
Low and Middle-Income Countries: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
of the Prevalence of Poor Sleep Quality and Sleep Duration,” Sleep Health, 4
(2018), 239–250.
Smith, Austin C., “Spring Forward at Your Own Risk: Daylight Saving Time and
Fatal Vehicle Crashes”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8
(2016), 65–91.
Smith, Michael T., Christina S. McCrae, Joseph Cheung, Jennifer L. Martin,
Christopher G. Harrod, Jonathan L Heald, and Kelly A. Carden, “Use of Actig-
raphy for the Evaluation of Sleep Disorders and Circadian Rhythm Sleep-
Wake Disorders: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine Clinical Practice
Guideline,” Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 14 (2018), 1231–1237.
Stranges, Saverio, William Tigbe, Francesc Gomze-Olive, Margaret Thorogood,
and Ngianga-Bakwain Kandala, “Sleep Problems: An Emerging Global Epi-
demic? Findings from the INDEPTH WHO-SAGE Study among More than
40,000 Older Adults from 8 Countries across Africa and Asia,” Sleep, 35 (2012),
1173–1181.
Strine, T., and D. Chapman, “Associations of Frequent Sleep Insufﬁciency with
Health-Related Quality of Life and Health Behaviors,” Sleep Medicine, 6
(2005), 23–27.
Takahashi, M, “The Role of Prescribed Napping in Sleep Medicine,” Sleep Medicine
Reviews, 7 (2003), 227–235.
Trauer, James M., Mary Y. Qian, Joseph S. Doyle, Shantha M. W. Rajaratnam,
and David Cunnington, “Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Chronic Insomnia:
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” Annals of Internal Medicine, 163
(2015), 191–204.
Van Dongen, Hans P. A., Greg Maislin, Janet M. Mullington, and David F. Dinges,
“The Cumulative Cost of Additional Wakefulness: Dose-Response Effects on
Neurobehavioral Functions and Sleep Physiology from Chronic Sleep Restric-
tion and Total Sleep Deprivation,” Sleep, 26 (2003), 117–126.
Vohs, Kathleen D., and Roy F. Baumeister, Handbook of Self-Regulation: Research,
Theory, and Applications (New York: Guilford Press, 2016).
Wagner, David T., Christopher M. Barnes, Vivien K. G. Lim, and D. Lance Ferris,
“Lost Sleep and Cyberloaﬁng: Evidence from the Laboratory and a Daylight
Saving Time Quasi-Experiment,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 97 (2012),
1068.
Walker, Matthew P., Why We Sleep: Unlocking the Power of Sleep and Dreams
(New York: Scribner, 2017).
Watson, Nathaniel F., Safwan M. Badr, Gregory Belenky, Donald L. Bliwise, Orfeu
M. Buxton, Daniel Buysse, David F. Dinges, and James Gangwisch et al.,
“Joint Consensus Statement of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine and
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 55 ---
THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASING SLEEP 1941
Sleep Research Society on the Recommended Amount of Sleep for a Healthy
Adult: Methodology and Discussion,” Sleep, 38 (2015), 1161–1183.
Westfall, Peter H., and S. Stanley Young, Resampling-Based Multiple Testing:
Examples and Methods for p-Value Adjustment (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1993).
Zhang, Jihui, Diana Paksarian, Femke Lamers, Ian B. Hickie, Jianping He, and
Kathleen Ries Merikangas, “Sleep Patterns and Mental Health Correlates in
US Adolescents,” Journal of Pediatrics, 182 (2017), 137–143.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/136/3/1887/6217436 by University of Florida user on 29 December 2025


--- Page 56 ---
CALL FOR NOMINATIONS
Northwestern University invites nominations for the Erwin Plein Nemmers Prize in Economics, to be 
awarded during the 2026–27 academic year. The prize pays the recipient $300,000. Recipients of the 
Nemmers Prize present lectures, participate in department seminars, and engage with Northwestern faculty 
and students in other scholarly activities.
Details about the prize and the nomination process can be found at nemmers.northwestern.edu. Candidacy 
for the Nemmers Prize is open to those with careers of outstanding achievement in their disciplines as 
demonstrated by major contributions to new knowledge or the development of significant new modes of 
analysis.Individuals of all nationalities and institutional affiliations are eligible except current or recent 
members of the Northwestern University faculty and past recipients of the Nemmers or Nobel Prize. 
Nominations will be accepted until January 14, 2026.
The Nemmers prizes are made possible by a generous gift to Northwestern University by the late Erwin Esser 
Nemmers and the late Frederic Esser Nemmers.
$300,000 Nemmers Prize in Economics 
Nemmers Prizes • Office of the Provost • Northwestern University • Evanston, Illinois 60208
nemmers.northwestern.edu
