--- Page 1 ---
 
The Nature of Love 
Harry F. Harlow (1958) 
 
 
Love is a wondrous state, deep, tender, and rewarding. Because of its intimate and personal nature it is 
regarded by some as an improper topic for experimental research. But, whatever our personal feelings 
may be, our assigned mission as psychologists is to analyze all facets of human and animal behavior into 
their component variables. So far as love or affection is concerned, psychologists have failed in this 
mission. The little we know about love does not transcend simple observation, and the little we write 
about it has been written better by poets and novelists. But of greater concern is the fact that psychologists 
tend to give progressively less attention to a motive which pervades our entire lives. Psychologists, at 
least psychologists who write textbooks, not only show no interest in the origin and development of love 
or affection, but they seem to be unaware of its very existence. 
 
The apparent repression of love by modem psychologists stands in sharp contrast with the attitude taken 
by many famous and normal people. The word "love" has the highest reference frequency of any word 
cited in Bartlett's book of Familiar Quotations. It would appear that this emotion has long had a vast 
interest and fascination for human beings, regardless of the attitude taken by psychologists; but the 
quotations cited, even by famous and normal people, have a mundane redundancy. These authors and 
authorities have stolen love from the child and infant and made it the exclusive property of the adolescent 
and adult. 
 
Thoughtful men, and probably all women, have speculated on the nature of love. From the developmental 
point of view, the general plan is quite clear: The initial love responses of the human being are those 
made by the infant to the mother or some mother surrogate. From this intimate attachment of the child to 
the mother, multiple learned and generalized affectional responses are formed. 
 
Unfortunately, beyond these simple facts we know little about the fundamental variables underlying the 
formation of affectional responses and little about the mechanisms through which the love of the infant 
for the mother develops into the multifaceted response patterns characterizing love or affection in the 
adult. Because of the dearth of experimentation, theories about the fundamental nature of affection have 
evolved at the level of observation, intuition, and discerning guesswork, whether these have been 
proposed by psychologists, sociologists, anthropologists, physicians, or psychoanalysts.  
 
The position commonly held by psychologists and sociologists is quite clear: The basic motives are, for 
the most part, the primary drives -- particularly hunger, thirst, elimination, pain, and sex -- and all other 
motives, including love or affection, are derived or secondary drives. The mother is associated with the 
reduction of the primary drives -- particularly hunger, thirst, and pain -- and through learning, affection or 
love is derived. 
 
It is entirely reasonable to believe that the mother through association with food may become a 
secondary-reinforcing agent, but this is an inadequate mechanism to account for the persistence of the 
infant-maternal ties. There is a spate of researches on the formation of secondary reinforcers to hunger 
and thirst reduction. There can be no question that almost any external stimulus can become a secondary 
reinforcer if properly associated with tissue-need reduction, but the fact remains that this redundant 
literature demonstrates unequivocally that such derived drives suffer relatively rapid experimental 
extinction. Contrariwise, human affection does not extinguish when the mother ceases to have intimate 
association with the drives in question. Instead, the affectional ties to the mother show a lifelong, 
unrelenting persistence and, even more surprising, widely expanding generality. 
 


--- Page 2 ---
Oddly enough, one of the few psychologists who took a position counter to modern psychological dogma 
was John B. Watson, who believed that love was an innate emotion elicited by cutaneous stimulation of 
the erogenous zones. But experimental psychologists, with their peculiar propensity to discover facts that 
are not true, brushed this theory aside by demonstrating that the human neonate had no differentiable 
emotions, and they established a fundamental psychological law that prophets are without honor in their 
own profession. 
 
The psychoanalysts have concerned themselves with the problem of the nature of the development of love 
in the neonate and infant, using ill and aging human beings as subjects. They have discovered the 
overwhelming importance of the breast and related this to the oral erotic tendencies developed at an age 
preceding their subjects' memories. Their theories range from a belief that the infant has an innate need to 
achieve and suckle at the breast to beliefs not unlike commonly accepted psychological theories. There 
are exceptions, as seen in the recent writings of John Bowlby, who attributes importance not only to food 
and thirst satisfaction, but also to "primary object-clinging," a need for intimate physical contact, which is 
initially associated with the mother. 
 
As far as I know, there exists no direct experimental analysis of the relative importance of the stimulus 
variables determining the affectional or love responses in the neonatal and infant primate. Unfortunately, 
the human neonate is a limited experimental subject for such researches because of his inadequate motor 
capabilities. By the time the human infant's motor responses can be precisely measured, the antecedent 
determining conditions cannot be defined, having been lost in a jumble and jungle of confounded 
variables. 
 
Many of these difficulties can be resolved by the use of the neonatal and infant macaque monkey as the 
subject for the analysis of basic affectional variables. It is possible to make precise measurements in this 
primate beginning at two to ten days of age, depending upon the maturational status of the individual 
animal at birth. The macaque infant differs from the human infant in that the monkey is more mature at 
birth and grows more rapidly; but the basic responses relating to affection, including nursing, contact, 
clinging, and even visual and auditory exploration, exhibit no fundamental differences in the two species. 
Even the development of perception, fear, frustration, and learning capability follows very similar 
sequences in rhesus monkeys and human children. 
 
Three years' experimentation before we started our studies on affection gave us experience with the 
neonatal monkey. We had separated more than 60 of these animals from their mothers 6 to 12 hours after 
birth and suckled them on tiny bottles. The infant mortality was only a small fraction of what would have 
obtained had we let the monkey mothers raise their infants. Our bottle-fed babies were healthier and 
heavier than monkey-mother-reared infants. We know that we are better monkey mothers than are real 
monkey mothers thanks to synthetic diets, vitamins, iron extracts, penicillin, chloromycetin, 5% glucose, 
and constant, tender, loving care. 
 
During the course of these studies we noticed that the laboratory raised babies showed strong attachment 
to the cloth pads (folded gauze diapers) which were used to cover the hardware-cloth floors of their cages. 
The infants clung to these pads and engaged in violet temper tantrums when the pads were removed and 
replaced for sanitary reasons. Such contact-need or responsiveness had been reported previously by 
Gertrude van Wagenen for the monkey and by Thomas McCulloch and George Haslerud for the 
chimpanzee and is reminiscent of the devotion often exhibited by human infants to their pillows, blankets, 
and soft, cuddly stuffed toys. Responsiveness by the one-day-old infant monkey to the cloth pad is shown 
in Figure 1, and an unusual and strong attachment of a six-month-old infant to the cloth pad is illustrated 
in Figure 2. The baby, human or monkey, if it is to survive, must clutch at more than a straw. 


--- Page 3 ---
 
We had also discovered during 
some allied observational studies 
that a baby monkey raised on a b
wire-mesh cage floor survives with 
difficulty, if at all, during the first 
five days of life. If a wire-mesh
cone is introduced, the baby does 
better; and, if the cone is covere
with terry cloth, husky, healthy, 
happy babies evolve. It takes mo
than a baby and a box to make a 
normal monkey. We were 
impressed by the possibility that, 
above and beyond the bubbling 
fountain of breast or bottle, con
comfort might be a very important 
variable in the development of 
infant's affection for the mot
At this point we decided t
are 
 
d 
re 
tact 
the 
her. 
o study 
 
e 
rogate 
 
pon 
ed 
 in 
lacing 
the development of affectional 
responses of neonatal and infant
monkeys to an artificial, inanimat
mother, and so we built a surrogate 
mother which we hoped and 
believed would be a good sur
mother. In devising this surrogate 
mother we were dependent neither
upon the capriciousness of 
evolutionary processes nor u
mutations produced by chance 
radioactive fallout. Instead, we 
designed the mother surrogate in terms of modem human engineering principles (Figure 3). We produc
a perfectly proportioned, streamlined body stripped of unnecessary bulges and appendices. Redundancy
the surrogate mother's system was avoided by reducing the number of breasts from two to one and p


--- Page 4 ---
this unibreast in an upper-thoracic, sagittal position, 
thus maximizing the natural and known perceptua
motor capabilities of the infant operator. The 
surrogate was made from a block of wood, cov
with sponge rubber, and sheathed in tan cotton terry 
cloth. A light bulb behind her radiated heat. The 
result was a mother, soft, warm, and tender, a 
mother with infinite patience, a mother availab
twenty-four hours a day, a mother that never 
scolded her infant and never struck or bit her b
in anger. Furthermore, we designed a mother-
machine with maximal maintenance efficiency
since failure of any system or function could be 
resolved by the simple substitution of black boxe
and new component parts. It is our opinion that we 
engineered a very superior monkey mother, 
although this position is not held universally 
monkey fathers. 
l-
ered 
le 
aby 
 
s 
by the 
 
Before beginning our initial experiment we also designed and constructed a second mother surrogate, a 
surrogate in which we deliberately built less than the maximal capability for contact comfort. This 
surrogate mother is illustrated in Figure 4. She is made of wire-mesh, a substance entirely adequate to 
provide postural support and nursing capability, and she is warmed by radiant heat. Her body differs in no 
essential way from that of the cloth mother surrogate other than in the quality of the contact comfort 
which she can supply. In our initial experiment, the dual mother-surrogate condition, a cloth mother and a 
wire mother were placed in different cubicles attached to the infant's living cage as shown in Figure 4. For 
four newborn monkeys the cloth mother lactated and the wire mother did not; and, for the other four, this 
condition was reversed. In either condition the infant received all its milk through the mother surrogate as 
soon as it was able to maintain itself in this way, a capability achieved within two or three days except in 
the case of very immature infants. Supplementary feedings were given until the milk intake from the 
mother surrogate was adequate. Thus, the experiment was designed as a test of the relative importance of 
the variables of contact comfort and nursing comfort. During the first 14 days of life the monkey's cage 
floor was covered with a heating pad wrapped in a folded gauze diaper, and thereafter the cage floor was 
bare. The infants were always free to leave the heating pad or cage floor to contact either mother, and the 
time spent on the surrogate mothers was automatically recorded. Figure 5 shows the total time spent cloth 
and wire mothers under the two conditions of feeding. These data make it obvious that contact comfort is 
a variable of overwhelming importance in the development of affectional response, whereas lactation is a 
variable of negligible importance. With age and opportunity to learn, subjects with the lactating wire 
mother showed decreasing responsiveness to her and increasing responsiveness to the nonlactating cloth 
mother, a finding completely contrary to any interpretation of derived drive in which the mother-form 
becomes conditioned to hunger-thirst reduction. The persistence of these differential responses throughout 
165 consecutive days of testing is evident in Figure 6. 


--- Page 5 ---
 
 
One control group of neonatal monkeys was raised on a single wire mother, and a second control group 
was raised on a single cloth mother. There were no differences between these two groups in amount of 
milk ingested or in weight gain. The only difference between the two groups lay in the composition of the 
feces, the softer stools of the wire-mother infants suggesting psychosomatic involvement. The wire 
mother is biologically adequate but psychologically inept. 
 
We were not surprised to discover that contact comfort was an important basic affectional or love 
variable, but we did not expect it to overshadow so completely the variable of nursing; indeed; indeed, the 
disparity is so great as to suggest that the primary function of nursing as an affectional variable is that of 
insuring frequent and intimate body contact of the infant with the mother. Certainly, man cannot live by 
milk alone. Love is an emotion that does not need to be bottle- or spoon-fed, and we may be sure that 
there is nothing to be gained by giving lip service to love. 
 


--- Page 6 ---
A charming lady once heard me describe these experiments and, when I subsequently talked to her, her 
face brightened with sudden insight: "Now I know what's wrong with me," she said, "I'm just a wire 
mother." Perhaps she was lucky. She might have been a wire wife. 
 
We believe that contact comfort has long served the animal kingdom as a motivating agent for affectional 
responses. Since at the present time we have no experimental data to substantiate this position, we supply 
information which must be accepted, if at all, on the basis of face validity:  
 
One function of the real mother, human or subhuman, and presumably of a mother surrogate, is to provide 
a haven of safety for the infant in times of fear and danger. The frightened or ailing child clings to its 
mother, not its father; and this selective responsiveness in times of distress, disturbance, or danger may be 
used as a measure of the strength of affectional bonds. We have tested this kind of differential 
responsiveness by presenting to the infants in their cages, in the presence of the two mothers, various 
fear-producing stimuli such as the moving toy bear illustrated in Figure 13. A typical response to a fear 
stimulus is shown in Figure 14, and the data on differential responsiveness are presented in Figure 15. It 
is apparent that the cloth mother is highly preferred over the wire one, and this differential selectivity is 
enhanced by age and experience. In this situation, the variable of nursing appears to be of absolutely no 
importance: the infant consistently seeks the soft mother surrogate regardless of nursing condition. 
 
 


--- Page 7 ---
 
Similarly, the mother or mother surrogate provides its young with a source of security, and this role or 
function is seen with special clarity when mother and child are in a strange situation. At the present time 
we have completed tests for this relationship on four of our eight baby monkeys assigned to the dual 
mother-surrogate condition by introducing them for three minutes into the strange environment of a room 
measuring six feet by six feet by six feet (also called the "open-field test") and containing multiple stimuli 
known to elicit curiosity-manipulatory responses in baby monkeys. The subjects were placed in this 
situation twice a week for eight weeks with no mother surrogate present during alternate sessions and the 
cloth mother present during the others. A cloth diaper was always available as one of the stimuli 
throughout all sessions. After one or two adaptation sessions, the infants always rushed to the mother 
surrogate when she was present and clutched her, rubbed their bodies against her, and frequently 
manipulated her body and face. After a few additional sessions, the infants began to use the mother 
surrogate as a source of security, a base of operations. As is shown in Figures 16 and 17, they would 
explore and manipulate a stimulus and then return to the mother before adventuring again into the strange 
new world. The behavior of these infants was quite different when the mother was absent from the room. 
Frequently they would freeze in a crouched position, as is illustrated in Figures 18 and 19. Emotionality 
indices such as vocalization, crouching, rocking, and sucking increased sharply, as shown in Figure 20. 
Total emotionality score was cut in half when the mother was present. In the absence of the mother some 
of the experimental monkeys would rush to the center of the room where the mother was customarily 
placed and then run rapidly from object to object, screaming and crying all the while. Continuous, frantic 
clutching of their bodies was very common, even when not in the crouching position. These monkeys 
frequently contacted and clutched the cloth diaper, but this action never pacified them. The same behavior 
occurred in the presence of the wire mother. No difference between the cloth-mother-fed and wire-
mother-fed infants was demonstrated under either condition. Four control infants never raised with a 
mother surrogate showed the same emotionality scores when the mother was absent as the experimental 
infants showed in the absence of the mother, but the controls' scores were slightly larger in the presence 
of the mother surrogate than in her absence. 


--- Page 9 ---
Some years ago Robert Butler 
demonstrated that mature monkeys 
enclosed in a dimly lighted box 
would open and reopen a door hour 
after hour for no other reward than 
that of looking outside the box. We 
now have data indicating that 
neonatal monkeys show this same 
compulsive visual curiosity on t
first test day in an adaptation of the
Butler apparatus which we call the
"love machine," an apparatu
designed to measure love. Usua
these tests are begun when the 
monkey is 10 days of age, but th
same persistent visual exploration 
has been obtained in a three-day-
old monkey during the first half-
hour of testing. Butler also 
demonstrated that rhesus monk
show selectivity in rate and 
frequency of door-opening to 
stimuli of differential attractiveness 
in the visual field outside the box. 
We have utilized this principle of 
response selectivity by the monkey 
to measure strength of affectional 
responsiveness in our infants in the 
baby version of the Butler box. The 
test sequence involves four 
repetitions of a test battery in w
four stimuli -- cloth mother, wire 
mother, infant monkey, and empty box -- are presented for a 30-minute period on successive days. The 
first four subjects in the dual mother-surrogate group were given a single test sequence at 40 to 50 days of 
age, depending upon the availability of the apparatus, and only their data are presented. The second s
four subjects is being given repetitive tests to obtain information relating to the development of visual 
exploration. The apparatus is illustrated in Figure 21. The data obtained from the first four infants rai
with the two mother surrogates are presented in the middle graph of Figure 22 and show approximately
equal responding to the cloth mother and another infant monkey, and no greater responsiveness 
wire mother than to an empty box. Again, the results are independent of the kind of mother that lactated, 
cloth or wire. The same results are found for a control group raised, but not fed, on a single cloth mother; 
these data appear in the graph on the right. Contrariwise, the graph on the left shows no differential 
responsiveness to cloth and wire mothers by a second control group, which was not raised on any mother 
surrogate. We can be certain that not all love is blind. 
heir 
 
 
s 
lly 
is 
eys 
hich 
et of 
sed 
 
to the 


--- Page 10 ---
 
The first four infant monkeys in the dual mother-surrogate group were separated from their mothers 
between 165 and 170 days of age and tested for retention during the following 9 days and then at 30-day 
intervals for six successive months. Affectional retention as measured by the modified Butler box is given 
in Figure 23. In keeping with the data obtained on adult monkeys by Butler, we find a high rate of 
responding to any stimulus, even the empty box. But throughout the entire 185-day retention period there 
is a consistent and significant difference in response frequency to the cloth mother contrasted with either 
the wire mother or the empty box, and no consistent difference between wire mother and empty box. 
 
Affectional retention was also tested in the open field during the first 9 days after separation and then at 
30-day intervals, and each test condition was run twice at each retention interval. The infant's behavior 
differed from that observed during the period preceding separation. When the cloth mother was present in 
the post-separation period, the babies rushed to her, climbed up, clung tightly to her, and rubbed their 
heads and faces against her body. After this initial embrace and reunion, they played on the mother, 
including biting and tearing at her cloth cover; but they rarely made any attempt to leave her during the 
test period, nor did they manipulate or play with the objects in the room, in contrast with their behavior 
before maternal separation. The only exception was the occasional monkey that left the mother surrogate 
momentarily, grasped the folded piece of paper (one of the standard stimuli in the field), and brought it 


--- Page 11 ---
quickly back to the mother. It appeared that deprivation had enhanced the tie to the mother and rendered 
the contact-comfort need so prepotent that need for the mother overwhelmed the exploratory motives 
during the brief, three-minute test sessions. No change in these behaviors was observed throughout the 
185-day period. When the mother was absent from the open field, the behavior of the infants was similar 
in the initial retention test to that during the preseparation tests; but they tended to show gradual 
adaptation to the open-field situation with repeated testing and, consequently, a reduction in their 
emotionality scores. 
 
In the last five retention test periods, an additional test was introduced in which the surrogate mother was 
placed in the center of the room and covered with a clear Plexiglas box. The monkeys were initially 
disturbed and frustrated when their explorations and manipulations of the box failed to provide contact 
with the mother. However, all animals adapted to the situation rather rapidly. Soon they used the box as a 
place of orientation for exploratory and play behavior, made frequent contacts with the objects in the 
field, and very often brought these objects to the Plexiglas box. The emotionality index was slightly 
higher than in the condition of the available cloth mothers, but it in no way approached the emotionality 
level displayed when the cloth mother was absent. Obviously, the infant monkeys gained emotional 
security by the presence of the mother even though contact was denied. 
 
Affectional retention has also been measured by tests in which the monkey must unfasten a three-device 
mechanical puzzle to obtain entrance into a compartment containing the mother surrogate. All the trials 
are initiated by allowing the infant to go through an unlocked door, and in half the trials it finds the 
mother present and in half, an empty compartment. The door is then locked and a ten-minute test 
conducted. In tests given prior to separation from the surrogate mothers, some of the infants had solved 
this puzzle and others had failed. The data of Figure 24 show that on the last test before separation there 
were no differences in total manipulation under mother-present and mother-absent conditions, but striking 
differences exist between the two conditions throughout the post-separation test periods. Again, there is 
no interaction with conditions of feeding. 
 
The over-all picture obtained from surveying the retention data is unequivocal. There is little, if any, 
waning of responsiveness to the mother throughout this five-month period as indicated by any measure. It 
becomes perfectly obvious that this affectional bond is highly resistant to forgetting and that it can be 
retained for very long periods of time by relatively infrequent contact reinforcement. During the next 
year, retention tests will be conducted at 90-day intervals, and further plans are dependent upon the results 
obtained. It would appear that affectional responses may show as much resistance to extinction as has 
been previously demonstrated for learned fears and learned pain, and such data would be in keeping with 
those of common human observation. 


--- Page 12 ---
The infant's responses to the mother surrogate in the fear tests, the open-field situation, and the baby 
Butler box and the responses on the retention tests cannot be described adequately with words. For 
supplementary information we turn to the motion picture record. (At this point a 20-minute film was 
presented illustrating and supplementing the behaviors described thus far in the address.) 
We have already described the group of four control infants that had never lived in the presence of any 
mother surrogate and had demonstrated no sign of affection or security in the presence of the cloth 
mothers introduced in test sessions. When these infants reached the age of 250 days, cubicles containing 
both a cloth mother and a wire mother were attached to their cages. There was no lactation in these 
mothers, for the monkeys were on a solid-food diet. The initial reaction of the monkeys to the alterations 
was one of extreme disturbance. All the infants screamed violently and made repeated attempts to escape 
the cage whenever the door was opened. They kept a maximum distance from the mother surrogates and 
exhibited a considerable amount of rocking and crouching behavior, indicative of emotionality. Our first 
thought was that the critical period for the development of maternally directed affection had passed and 
that these macaque children were doomed to live as affectional orphans. Fortunately, these behaviors 
continued for only 12 to 48 hours and then gradually ebbed, changing from indifference to active contact 
on, and exploration of, the surrogates. The home-cage behavior of these control monkeys slowly became 
similar to that of the animals raised with the mother surrogates from birth. Their manipulation and play on 
the cloth mother became progressively more vigorous to the point of actual mutilation, particularly during 
the morning after the cloth mother had been given her daily change of terry covering. The control subjects 
were now actively running to the cloth mother when frightened and had to be coaxed from her to be taken 
from the cage for formal testing. 
 
Objective evidence of these changing behaviors is given in Figure 25, which plots the amount of time 
these infants spent on the mother surrogates. Within 10 days mean contact time is approximately nine 
hours, and this measure remains relatively constant throughout the next 30 days. Consistent with the 
results on the subjects reared from birth with dual mothers, these late-adopted infants spent less than one 
and one-half hours per day in contact with the wire mothers, and this activity level was relatively constant 
throughout the test sessions. Although the maximum time that the control monkeys spent on the cloth 
mother was only about half that Spent by the original dual mother-surrogate group, we cannot be sure that 
this discrepancy is a function of differential early experience. The control monkeys were about three 
months older when the mothers were attached to their cages than the experimental animals had been when 
their mothers were removed and the retention tests begun. Thus, we do not know what the amount of 
contact would be for a 250-day-old animal raised from birth with surrogate mothers. Nevertheless, the 
magnitude of the differences and the fact that the contact-time curves for the mothered-from-birth infants 
had remained constant for almost 150 days suggest that early experience with the mother is a variable of 
measurable importance. 


--- Page 13 ---
 
The control group has also been tested for differential visual exploration after the introduction of the cloth 
and wire mothers; these behaviors are plotted in Figure 26. By the second test session a high level of 
exploratory behavior had developed, and the responsiveness to the wire mother and the empty box is 
significantly greater than that to the cloth mother. This is probably not an artifact since there is every 
reason to believe that the face of the cloth mother is a fear stimulus to most monkeys that have not had 
extensive experience with this object during the first 40 to 60 days of life. Within the third test session a 
sharp change in trend occurs, and the cloth mother is then more frequently viewed than the wire mother or 
the blank box; this trend continues during the fourth session, producing a significant preference for the 
cloth mother. 
 
Before the introduction of the mother surrogate into the home-cage situation, only one of the four control 
monkeys had ever contacted the cloth mother in the open-field tests. In general, the surrogate mother not 
only gave the infants no security, but instead appeared to serve as a fear stimulus. The emotionality scores 
of these control subjects were slightly higher during the mother-present test sessions than during the 
mother-absent test sessions. These behaviors were changed radically by the fourth post-introduction test 
approximately 60 days later. In the absence of the cloth mothers the emotionality index in this fourth test 
remains near the earlier level, but the score is reduced by half when the mother is present, a result 


--- Page 14 ---
strikingly similar to that found for infants raised with the dual mother-surrogates from birth. The control 
infants now show increasing object exploration and play behavior, and they begin to use the mother as a 
base of operations, as did the infants raised from birth with the mother surrogates. However, there are still 
definite differences in the behavior of the two groups. The control infants do not rush directly to the 
mother and clutch her violently; but instead they go toward, and orient around, her, usually after an initial 
period during which they frequently show disturbed behavior, exploratory behavior, or both. 
 
That the control monkeys develop affection or love for the cloth mother when she is introduced into the 
cage at 250 days of age cannot be questioned. There is every reason to believe, however, that this interval 
of delay depresses the intensity of the affectional response below that of the infant monkeys that were 
surrogate-mothered from birth onward. In interpreting these data it is well to remember that the control 
monkeys had had continuous opportunity to observe and hear other monkeys housed in adjacent cages 
and that they had had limited opportunity to view and contact surrogate mothers in the test situations, 
even though they did not exploit the opportunities. 
 
During the last two years we have observed the behavior of two infants raised by their own mothers. Love 
for the real mother and love for the surrogate mother appear to be very similar. The baby macaque spends 
many hours a day clinging to its real mother. If away from the mother when frightened, it rushes to her 
and in her presence shows comfort and composure. As far as we can observe, the infant monkey's 
affection for the real mother is strong, but no stronger than that of the experimental monkey for the 
surrogate cloth mother, and the security that the infant gains from the presence of the real mother is no 
greater than the security it gains from a cloth surrogate. Next year we hope to put this problem to final, 
definitive, experimental test. But, whether the mother is real or a cloth surrogate, there does develop a 
deep and abiding bond between mother and child. In one case it may be the call of the wild and in the 
other the McCall of civilization, but in both cases there is "togetherness." 
 
In spite of the importance of contact comfort, there is reason to believe that other variables of measurable 
importance will be discovered. Postural support may be such a variable, and it has been suggested that, 
when we build arms into the mother surrogate, 10 is the minimal number required to provide adequate 
child care. Rocking motion may be such a variable, and we are comparing rocking and stationary mother 
surrogates and inclined planes. The differential responsiveness to cloth mother and cloth-covered inclined 
plane suggests that clinging as well as contact is an affectional variable of importance. Sounds, 
particularly natural, maternal sounds, may operate as either unlearned or learned affectional variables. 
Visual responsiveness may be such a variable, and it is possible that some semblance of visual imprinting 
may develop in the neonatal monkey. There are indications that this becomes a variable of importance 
during the course of infancy through some maturational process. 
 
John Bowlby has suggested that there is an affectional variable which he calls "primary object following," 
characterized by visual and oral search of the mother's face. Our surrogate-mother-raised baby monkeys 
are at first inattentive to her face, as are human neonates to human mother faces. But by 30 days of age 
ever-increasing responsiveness to the mother's face appears -- whether through learning, maturation, or 
both -- and we have reason to believe that the face becomes an object of special attention. 
 
Our first surrogate-mother-raised baby had a mother whose head was just a ball of wood since the baby 
was a month early and we had not had time to design a more esthetic head and face. This baby had 
contact with the blank-faced mother for 180 days and was then placed with two cloth mothers, one 
motionless and one rocking, both being endowed with painted, ornamented faces. To our surprise the 
animal would compulsively rotate both faces 180 degrees so that it viewed only a round, smooth face and 
never the painted, ornamented face. Furthermore, it would do this as long as the patience of the 
experimenter in reorienting the faces persisted. The monkey showed no sign of fear or anxiety, but it 
showed unlimited persistence. Subsequently it improved its technique, compulsively removing the heads 


--- Page 15 ---
and rolling them into its cage as fast as they were returned. We are intrigued by this observation, and we 
plan to examine systematically the role of the mother face in the development of infant-monkey 
affections. Indeed, these observations suggest the need for a series of ethological-type researches on the 
two-faced female. 
 
Although we have made no attempts thus far to study the generalization of infant-macaque affection or 
love, the techniques which we have developed offer promise in this uncharted field. Beyond this, there are 
few if any technical difficulties in studying the affection of the actual, living mother for the child, and the 
techniques developed can be utilized and expanded for the analysis and developmental study of father-
infant and infant-infant affection. 
 
Since we can measure neonatal and infant affectional responses to mother surrogates, and since we know 
they are strong and persisting, we are in a position to assess the effects of feeding and contactual 
schedules; consistency and inconsistency in the mother surrogates; and early, intermediate, and late 
maternal deprivation. Again, we have here a family of problems of fundamental interest and theoretical 
importance. 
 
If the researches completed and proposed make a contribution, I shall be grateful; but I have also given 
full thought to possible practical applications. The socioeconomic demands of the present and the 
threatened socioeconomic demands of the future have led the American woman to displace, or threaten to 
displace, the American man in science and industry. If this process continues, the problem of proper 
child-rearing practices faces us with startling clarity. It is cheering in view of this trend to realize that the 
American male is physically endowed with all the really essential equipment to compete with the 
American female on equal terms in one essential activity: the rearing of infants. We now know that 
women in the working classes are not needed in the home because of their primary mammalian 
capabilities; and it is possible that in the foreseeable future neonatal nursing will not be regarded as a 
necessity, but as a luxury ---to use Veblen's term -- a form of conspicuous consumption limited perhaps to 
the upper classes. But whatever course history may take, it is comforting to know that we are now in 
contact with the nature of love. 
 
