--- Page 1 ---
© 2020 Investments & Wealth Institute®. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved.
A reprinted article from Volume 9, Number 1, 2020
RETIREMENT
MANAGEMENT
JOURNAL
Ergodicity Economics in Plain English
By François Gadenne, RMA®


--- Page 2 ---
VOLUME 9
NUMBER 1
2020
61
RETIREMENT MANAGEMENT JOURNAL
UNCONVENTIONAL WISDOM
The arithmetic mean of two magnitudes is greater than their 
geometric mean. This inequality of means has been known 
for a long time.
In the late 2000s, a physicist affiliated with the Imperial College 
in London, the University of California, Los Angeles, and the 
Santa Fe Institute, Ole Peters, turned his gaze from weather 
patterns to wealth patterns and wrote papers that provided clear 
distinctions between:
	
A Methods of averaging (arithmetic means versus 
geometric means) 
	
A Meanings of averaging (ensemble expectation versus 
time average) 
	
A Reasons for these different meanings (additive versus 
multiplicative growth dynamics) 

These are distinctions with a difference because the average 
experience of an ensemble over many trajectories may not be 
the average experience of an individual over a single life history. 
Using ensemble expectations inappropriately, i.e., for non-ergodic 
observables, misleads individuals because it implies a physical sys­
tem of counterfactuals that cannot exist in a single life trajectory. 
ABSTRACT
Ergodicity economics (EE) applies a modern mathematical 
formal­ization to familiar financial concepts to reveal implications 
and consequences that were previously unseen. EE quantifies 
the differences and the trade-offs between the collective meaning 
and the individual meaning of financial methods. EE’s perspec­
tive opens up previously unseen distinctions for evidence-based 
recommendations. These distinctions enable the creation of 
previously unavailable recommendations for the explicit benefit 
of individual clients. This differentiating impact on economic 
theory, asset valuation, product development, and advisory 
best practices is developing rapidly. 
INTRODUCTION
E
rgodicity economics (EE) is a mathematical model of 
growth with historical anchors that go back to Euclid 
(third century BCE) in Book V, Proposition 25: ᾿Εὰν 
τέσσαρα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον ᾖ, τὸ μέγιστον [αὐτῶν] καὶ 
τὸ ἐλάχιστον δύο τῶν λοιπῶν μείζονά ἐστιν. “If four magni­
tudes are proportional then the (sum of the) largest and the 
smallest [of them] is greater than the (sum of the) remaining 
two (magnitudes).” A special case occurs when the middle terms 
are the same, in which case this proposition gives us a corollary: 
Ergodicity Economics in Plain English
By François Gadenne, RMA®
Ergodicity economics (EE) is an important extension of 
traditional finance. It solves the limitations of the assum­-
ption of ergodicity that is at the core of economics 
since 1947.
The assumption of ergodicity implies a clockwork sameness 
between the past and the future. Ergodic systems have no 
history and thus can have an equilibrium. However, any 
system that grows is non-ergodic because it has a history 
generated by its unique growth rates.
The terminology of EE will feel unfamiliar. It was brought 
to us by physicists trained in the German tradition of mathe­
matics. At the very least, the mathematical notation requires 
a period of adaptation. Further, EE’s terminology can be 
a confusing blend of old and new concepts, thus the addition 
of a glossary at the end of this paper.
The context for EE also will feel unfamiliar. It pushes us to 
acknowledge the presence, the meaning, and the importance 
of other types of means, above and beyond the familiar arith­
metic average.
The value that it brings to the financial industry is well worth 
the familiarization effort. As a counterweight to the age of 
holistic financial planning, EE provides a quantitative 
approach for direct product selection by matching clients to 
investment vehicles with metrics that include growth dynam­
ics, time-averages, minimum holding periods, and maxi­
mum investment allocations. 
© 2020 Investments & Wealth Institute. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved.


--- Page 3 ---
VOLUME 9
NUMBER 1
2020
62  RETIREMENT MANAGEMENT JOURNAL
UNCONVENTIONAL WISDOM | Ergodicity Economics in Plain English 
Ergodic. On the other hand, an observable is ergodic when
its time average is equal to its ensemble average at the ensemble 
and time limits of infinity. This is a special situation that arises 
in closed systems viewed by an external observer, and with 
no dependence on initial conditions, is thus able to reach a 
long-term equilibrium. This is an analytic understanding of 
time that “integrates time away” where the future is a symmetrical 
mirror of the past. Under such circumstances, the arithmetic mean 
(ensemble average) is a reasonable proxy and calculation simplifi­
cation for the behavior of the geometric mean (time average).
To explore the behavior of ergodic and non-ergodic observables 
beyond the contingency of historical data requires generative 
processes for discrete as well as continuous random variables. 
EE uses several types of generative processes, including:
	
A Geometric Brownian motion that connects EE to portfolio 
construction (Peters and Klein 2013)
	
A Gambles (multiplicative binomial processes) that connect 
EE to decision theory (Peters and Gell-Mann 2016)
	
A Reallocating geometric Brownian motion that connects 
EE to economics (Berman et al. 2020)
Given these inputs of noisy choices, EE models spin the 
following three mathematical threads into its new decision-
making cloth:
MODES OF REPETITION
	
A Growth dynamics are mathematical expressions (differential 
equations) that calculate trajectories (stochastic processes 
that represent life histories of wealth, distributions of 
returns, etc.). 
	
A Additive growth dynamics are akin to receiving a monthly 
income.
	
A Multiplicative growth dynamics are akin to earning interest 
on a bank account.

SUMMARY STATISTICS
	
A Means are statistics, summaries of the characteristics of trajec­
tories, and distributions as a single number (scalar) between 
two numbers (maximum and minimum). Among the many 
types of mathematical means that exist (including the contra-
harmonic, quadratic, arithmetic, median, logarithmic, geomet­
ric, and harmonic means), EE focuses on the meanings of the 
arithmetic mean and the geometric mean. 
	
A The meaning of the arithmetic mean, adding up observations 
and dividing them by the number of observations, is the expec­
tation of the ensemble across its possible realizations for a spe­
cific time frame. This is an averaging across parallel universes. 
	
A The meaning of the geometric mean, multiplying observations 
and taking their nth root based on the number of observations, 
is the average of an individual trajectory over the long term. 
This is a realization over a single trajectory.
LITERATURE REVIEW
EE applies a modern mathematical formalization to familiar con­
cepts to reveal relationships and consequences that previously 
were unseen. This combination of old and new changes 
our understanding of many topics, and finance in particular, in 
fundamental ways, akin to seeing reality through a new lens. 
In 2011, Peters published two papers that started the formal 
development of ergodicity economics: “Optimal Leverage from 
Non-ergodicity” (Peters 2011a) and “The Time Resolution 
of the St. Petersburg Paradox” (Peters 2011b). In 2013, a preprint 
submission to the Journal of Economic Theory, “Stochastic 
Market Efficiency,” showed his affiliation with the London 
Mathematical Laboratory (LML). Since then, he has published 
more than ten papers exploring the many financial puzzles, para­
doxes, and anomalies that are resolved by EE. His co-authors 
include Alexander Adamou, Yonatan Berman, Murray Gell-
Mann, Mark Kirstein, William Klein, Diomedes Mavroyiannis, 
and Maximilian J. Werner.
In a series of tweets in 2020, Ole Peters expanded EE’s intellec­
tual lineage to include Gerolamo Cardano, Ludwig Boltzmann,  
William Allen Whitworth, Kiyosi Ito, J. L. Kelly, Edward O. 
Thorpe, Anthony B. Atkinson, Thomas Cover, Robert Fernholz, 
A. Kacelnick, Matteo Marsili et al., Jean-Philippe Bouchaud et 
al., and Menahem E. Yaari et al.
J. L. Kelly is one of the better known of these historical examples 
of understanding the difference between arithmetic and geomet­
ric means. EE frames up the general case. Kelly and others are 
special cases. The Kelly Formula is a special case where the 
growth dynamic is multiplicative and the transformation function 
is the logarithm. 
This list of EE-related authors is impressive, but it is remarkably 
small compared to the number of authors of finance papers 
who do not make use of this understanding of the differentiated 
meaning between ensemble expectation and time average. 
This may change over time because EE is a research framework 
that encompasses and extends the body of knowledge of tradi­
tional finance. 
Non-ergodic. An observable is non-ergodic when its time 
average is not equal to its ensemble average at the ensemble 
and time limits of infinity. This situation arises in open systems 
where individual outcomes can differ in magnitude and in 
sign from the ensemble outcome due to path dependency 
for individual trajectories. This is a historical understanding 
of time where “symmetry breaking” between the past and 
the future is a creative force. Under such circumstances, the 
arithmetic mean (ensemble average) overstates the geometric 
mean (time average) and using insufficiently constrained utility 
functions results in willful blindness to excessive risk.
© 2020 Investments & Wealth Institute. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved.


--- Page 4 ---
VOLUME 9
NUMBER 1
2020
63
RETIREMENT MANAGEMENT JOURNAL
UNCONVENTIONAL WISDOM | Ergodicity Economics in Plain English 
Equity Premium Puzzle (Peters and Adamou 2013). Normal 
fluctuation/error rate of a noisy growth process
The Puzzle of Cooperation (Peters and Adamou 2015). 
Variance reduction explains the paradox without recourse to 
external explanations
The Puzzle of Inequality (Adamou and Peters 2016). High 
variance leads to winner-takes-all growth where the ensemble 
average is a gain, but the time average is a loss for nearly all in 
the ensemble
The Paradox of Insurance (Peters and Adamou 2017). Price 
ranges where both parties can increase their respective time 
average growth rates
Circular Axiomatics (Peters and Adamou 2018). From 
unconstrained psychological re-weighting of wealth to non-
linear transformations that define ergodic observables
Preference Reversals (Adamou et al. 2019; Berman and 
Kirstein 2020). Time average changes over changing time 
horizons and changing payouts
Probability Weighting (Peters et al. 2020). At a minimum, 
differences in variance assumptions between the disinterested 
observer’s model and the decision-maker’s model
EE provides a first-order, internally generated, growth-based 
decision criterion for recommendations, including an error range, 
and testable predictions. It opens up a vast field for additional 
research both within and outside of EE models. For instance, if 
first-order preferences are determined by growth dynamics, are 
there second-order personality differen­ces whose influence can 
be disambiguated from the first-order preference?
CONSEQUENCES
EE sees reality through the lens of growth rates, a world view 
where we live on the expanding edge of an exploding cosmos, 
evolving organic life, accumulating knowledge, developing tech­
nologies, and complex economies. It is a set of principles, derived 
from physics and applied to economics, to improve our under­
standing of mathematical averages from mechanical methodolo­
gies to meaningful interpretations. Specifically, the meaning of 
the arithmetic mean (expected value, expectation, ensemble 
average) is averaging over counterfactuals, i.e., parallel universes. 
The meaning of the geometric mean (time average) is averaging 
over the long term of an individual trajectory. 
GROWTH OPTIMALITY
An observable with a multiplicative growth dynamic can have 
a positive arithmetic mean and a negative geometric mean. 
This means that the ensemble expectation is a gain but the 
ERGODIC TRANSFORMATIONS
	
A EE uses specific mathematical transformations to modify the 
characteristics of non-ergodic trajectories and distributions 
into ergodic observables. 
	
A Ergodic transformations connect EE to expected utility theory 
(Peters and Adamou 2018).
	
A The logarithmic transformation holds a special place because 
it is both a transformation of periodic return multipliers into 
growth rates and an ergodic transformation of non-ergodic 
trajectories with multiplicative growth dynamics.
Finally, EE creates testable predictions for its own theory and 
results, including the internal decision criterion of growth 
optimality: Are people first-order growth-optimizers based 
on the circumstances of their growth dynamic? Early results, 
such as Meder et al. (2019), validate EE’s prediction of 
growth optimality. Peters and his colleagues at the London 
Mathematical Laboratory are actively encouraging additional 
empirical tests.
IMPLICATIONS
Kirstein (2015) documents how ergodicity was formally created 
by Ludwig Boltzmann in 1884 to solve a calculation problem in 
modeling the behavior of gases in a closed jar. He was explicit 
that this equalization of arithmetic mean and geometric mean 
was a mathematical trick (“kunstgriff”) to simplify calculations. 
Boltzmann’s simplification was introduced into economics by 
Paul Samuelson in 1947 (Foundations of Economic Analysis). 
This explicit introduction seemed tacitly accepted without objec­
tions, long forgotten by all involved until Peters showed the 
implications and consequences of its meaning on the open 
systems of economics and finance.
Samuelson’s ergodic axiom always answers “yes” to the ques­
tion: Is the time average of an observable equal to its expec­
tation value? This introduction from closed-system physics 
to open-system economics, the ergodic axiom, is the founda­
tion for many puzzles, paradoxes, and anomalies that arise 
between academic theory and empirical observations in finance 
and economics. 
The assumption of the ergodic axiom in open systems leads 
to the ergodic fallacy: The false belief in relationships that do 
not exist or that change constantly. EE does not assume the 
ergodic axiom. Instead, it calculates the explicit conditions 
where ergodicity may, or may not, apply. Thus, EE resolves 
many puzzles, paradoxes, and anomalies in traditional finance, 
including:
St. Petersburg Paradox (Peters 2011b). Unlike the time 
average solution, the ensemble solution is dominated by the 
infinite payout
© 2020 Investments & Wealth Institute. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved.


--- Page 5 ---
VOLUME 9
NUMBER 1
2020
64  RETIREMENT MANAGEMENT JOURNAL
UNCONVENTIONAL WISDOM | Ergodicity Economics in Plain English 
quantify risk tolerance without recourse to self-referential psycho­
logical explanations. Ergodic transformations are downstream from 
the means of non-ergodic observables and quantify utility theory 
without recourse to self-referential psychological explanations.
Recognizing the meaning of the means makes it possible 
to provide first-order optimization, asset allocation, and product 
selection recommendations to clients without a recourse to exter­
nal and unreliable inputs such as psycho­logical preferences.
OPEN QUESTIONS
EE’s perspective lifts us above traditional academic and explana­
tory silos to combine old and new into improved best practices. 
For instance:
	
A What behavioral finance observations could be confounded 
variables caused by the absence of an explicit specification 
of the relevant growth dynamic?
	
A What phases of investment planning and retirement planning 
have additive versus multiplicative growth dynamics? 
	
A When does it make sense to shift from risk-seeking to 
risk-avoiding exposures, not because of one’s changing 
psycho­logical preferences but because of one’s changing 
growth dynamic? 
	
A What do you use, currently, to make these decisions?

CONCLUSIONS
EE is a new perspective, expressed as a mathematical language 
that arises from calculating ergodic observables for non-ergodic 
growth processes. EE works alongside the traditional economic 
models to transcend their results. In particular, EE is able to pro­
vide recommendations that are organic to the model and do not 
require external assumptions based on psychology.
EE quantifies the differences and the trade-offs between the col­
lective meaning and the individual meaning of financial methods. 
EE’s perspective opens up previously unseen distinctions for 
evidence-based recommendations. These distinctions enable 
the creation of previously unavailable recommendations for the 
explicit benefit of individual clients. This differentiating impact 
on economic theory, asset valuation, product development, and 
advisory best practices is developing rapidly. 
François Gadenne, RMA®, is co-founder, chairman, and executive director 
at the Curve, Triangle, & Rectangle Institute. He serves on the Retirement 
Management Journal editorial advisory board. Contact him at 
fg@ctri-usa.org.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper benefited from detailed comments from John 
Dundas, Allen Farrington, Tim Garrett, Mark Kirstein, Mike 
Lonier, William Selden, Naveen Sinha, and Mike Zwecher.
individual realization is a loss, i.e., the market shows positive 
returns but most investors lose money. This is caused by the 
oversized influence of a small number of winner-take-all 
investors. EE’s geometric mean formula shows that the driver 
for such disparities is the volatility (variance) of the growth rate. 
EE provides a new default model to anticipate the behavior 
of individuals: growth optimality. This new default model posits 
that people are first-order growth optimizers based on the 
circumstances of their growth dynamics. Growth optimality is 
based on making the distinction and calculating the differences 
between maximizing the expectation value of ergodic observ­
ables versus maximizing the expectation value of non-ergodic 
observables. 
CLIENT BEHAVIOR
Insights derived from EE’s solutions to traditional puzzles, para­
doxes, and anomalies show that for individuals seeing decisions 
through the lens of an additive growth dynamic, i.e., no skin in 
the game, no bankruptcy, and expected monthly payments, the 
growth optimal strategy is to lever up exposure to risky assets 
because there are no “game-over” consequences from zero. Is 
your decision-making environment an additive growth dynamic? 
On the other hand, for individuals seeing decisions through the 
lens of a multiplicative dynamic, i.e., skin in the game, threat 
of bankruptcy, and uncertain returns on investment, the growth 
optimal strategy is cautious exposures to risky assets because 
there is no recovering from zero. Is your decision-making envi­
ronment a multiplicative growth dynamic?
ADVISOR BEHAVIOR
Seeing a client’s multiplicative growth dynamic through the lens 
of an advisor’s additive growth dynamic, i.e., optimizing a multi­
plicative dynamic with a non-ergodic arithmetic mean, leads 
to over-aggressive expectations. Similarly, seeing an additive 
growth dynamic through the lens of a multiplicative dynamic, 
i.e., optimizing an additive dynamic with a geometric mean, 
leads to overcautious expectations.
Growth creates noisy patterns that confound commonly used 
metrics such as expectation values. EE makes the confounding 
observable explicit (growth dynamic), flags false (non-ergodic) 
expectations, and provides first-order (time average) recommen­
dations that do not require an appeal to external, unconstrained 
(preferencing) variables. 
PRODUCT SELECTION
EE extends our understanding upstream as well as downstream 
from the means of non-ergodic observables. Growth dynamics 
are upstream from the means of non-ergodic observables and 
© 2020 Investments & Wealth Institute. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved.


--- Page 6 ---
VOLUME 9
NUMBER 1
2020
65
RETIREMENT MANAGEMENT JOURNAL
UNCONVENTIONAL WISDOM | Ergodicity Economics in Plain English 
GLOSSARY
EE’s terminology can be a confusing blend of old and new 
concepts, thus the addition of a glossary to this paper.
Arithmetic mean
Method: The arithmetic mean sums up observations and 
divides them by the number of observations.
Ensemble average
Method: The ensemble average takes the arithmetic mean 
at the ensemble limit of infinity.
Meaning: The ensemble average is an average across the 
ensemble of possible realizations (trajectories), thus an aver­
age across counterfactuals, or parallel universes.
Ergodic observable
An observable whose ensemble average is equal to its time average. 
Ergodic transformation
An ergodic transformation is a functional transformation of a 
trajectory that enables the computation of ergodic observables.
Gamble
A gamble is a random variable that generates a set of possible 
changes in monetary wealth with associated probabilities over 
a number of elementary events. The gamble, a discrete version 
of geometric Brownian motion, is the first data gen­eration 
mechanism that readers encounter in Ole Peters’ Course Notes.
Geometric mean
Method: The geometric mean multiplies observations and 
takes the nth root.
Growth dynamic
A growth dynamic is a differential equation that defines the 
decision-maker’s perspective used to choose between gam­
bles. It is the mode of repetition that uses a gamble’s specific 
inputs to create a trajectory, a stochastic process.
Observable
An observable can be a time series, a trajectory of prices, that 
forms the basis for other observables such as periodic returns, 
multipliers, and growth rates. Observables can be ergodic or 
non-ergodic. 
Time average
Method: The time average takes the geometric mean at the 
time limit of infinity.
Meaning: The time average is an average across the time line 
of a single realization, or trajectory.
REFERENCES
Adamou, A., and O. Peters. 2016. Dynamics of Inequality. 
Significance 13, no. 3 (June): 32–37.
Adamou, A., Y. Berman, D. Mavroyiannis, and O. Peters. 2019. 
Microfoundations of Discounting. Researchers.One. https://
www.researchers.one/article/2019-10-7. 
Berman, Y., O. Peters, and A. Adamou. 2020. Wealth Inequality and 
the Ergodic Hypothesis: Evidence from the United States (July 15). 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2794830.
Berman, Y., and M. Kirstein. 2020. Risk Preferences in Time 
Lotteries. Researchers.One. https://www.researchers.one/
article/2020-02-16.
Euclid. 3rd century BCE. Euclid’s Elements, Book V, Proposition 25. 
https://mathcs.clarku.edu/~djoyce/java/elements/bookV/prop
V25.html.
Kirstein, M. 2015. From the Ergodic Hypothesis in Physics to the 
Ergodic Axiom in Economics. 7th Winter Conference of Institute 
for the Comprehensive Analysis of the Economy, University of 
Linz, December 4–5, 2015. 
Meder, D., F. Rabe, T. Morville, K. H. Madsen, M. T. Koudahl, 
Ray J. Dolan, H. R. Siebner, and O. J. Hulme. 2019. Ergodicity-
breaking Reveals Time Optimal Economic Behavior in Humans. 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04652.
Peters, O. 2009. On Time and Risk. Santa Fe Institute Bulletin 24, 
no. 1: 36-41. http://tuvalu.santafe.edu/~ole/Peters2009.pdf.
———. 2011a. Optimal Leverage from Non-ergodicity. Quantitative 
Finance 11, no. 11 (November): 1,593–1,602. 
———. 2011b. The Time Resolution of the St. Petersburg Paradox. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 369, no. 1956 
(December): 4,913–4,931.
———. 2019. The Ergodicity Problem in Economics. Nature Physics 
15, no. 12 (December): 1,216–1,221. https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41567-019-0732-0.
Peters, O., and A. Adamou. 2013. Stochastic Market Efficiency. 
Working paper 06-022, Santa Fe Institute. https://
sfi-edu.s3.amazonaws.com/sfi-edu/production/uploads/
sfi-com/dev/uploads/filer/fd/b3/fdb3214b-5c1f-4832-8337-
310dab0836b4/13-06-022.pdf.
———. 2015. The Evolutionary Advantage of Cooperation. 
arXiv:1506.03414v1 
———. 2017. Insurance Makes Wealth Grow Faster. https://arxiv.org/
abs/1507.04655v2.
———. 2018. The Time Interpretation of Expected Utility Theory. 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.03680.
———. 2020. Ergodicity Economics Lecture Notes. 
Peters, O., and M. Gell-Mann. 2016. Evaluating Gambles 
Using Dynamics. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of 
Nonlinear Science 26 023103. https://aip.scitation.org/
doi/10.1063/1.4940236.
Peters, O., and W. Klein. 2013. Ergodicity Breaking in Geometric 
Brownian Motion. Physical Review Letters 100, 100603. http://
tuvalu.santafe.edu/~ole/PetersKlein2013.pdf.
Peters, O., A. Adamou, M. Kirstein, and Y. Berman. 2020. What Are 
We Weighting For? A Mechanistic Model for Probability Weighting 
(April 29). https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2005/2005.00056.pdf.
Samuelson, P. 1947. Foundations of Economic Analysis. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
© 2020 Investments & Wealth Institute. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved.


--- Page 7 ---
®
© 2020 Investments & Wealth Institute®. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved.
INVESTMENTS & WEALTH INSTITUTE® is a registered mark of Investment Management Consultants Association Inc. doing business as Investments & Wealth 
Institute. CIMA®, CERTIFIED INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT ANALYST®, CIMC®, CPWA®, CERTIFIED PRIVATE WEALTH ADVISOR®, RMA®, and RETIREMENT MANAGEMENT 
ADVISOR® are registered certification marks of Investment Management Consultants Association Inc. doing business as Investments & Wealth Institute. 
5619 DTC Parkway, Suite 500
Greenwood Village, CO  80111
Phone: +1 303-770-3377
Fax: +1 303-770-1812
www.investmentsandwealth.org
