--- Page 1 ---
A Review on Internet of Thing for Home 
Automation 
 
Radhika Garg1  
1Assistant Professor, 
 Vaish College of Engineering, Rohtak 
 
Swati Gupta2 
2Assistant Professor, 
 Vaish College of Engineering, Rohtak 
Abstract: Internet of things(IOT) is the extension of current 
internet to provide communication and connection between 
different devices. This paper provides a review on IOT based 
home appliances which can make human life easier. There are 
different areas where IOT based device are used. IOT based 
home appliance can be easily managed from a distance. IOT 
based devices can be controlled at remote location without 
interference of human. There are several researches related to 
home Automation Platform using IOT device. The review 
paper would be helpful to know about IOT, IOT architecture, 
its benefits and working process of IOT based devices for 
home automation. In addition to this, this review paper would 
be helpful to know about different technologies and protocols. 
 
Keyword: IOT, Home Automation, Sensors, IOT based 
Appliances 
 
[1] INTRODUCTION 
Demand of IOT is increasing day to day as the demand of 
internet is increasing. Different IOT based devices or 
appliance are used to reduce the wastage of time by 
allowing user to operate their devices form any distance 
without any delay. There are several IOT systems which 
can be easily used for home automation based as well as 
industrial automation based. Generally the applications of 
IOT devices are divided according to their use in several 
sectors. There is numerous IOT application used in 
consumer sector. A number of applications used to fulfil 
the commercial purposes. In industrial sector these are very 
helpful. A lot of IOT application used in infrastructure 
spaces also. 
 
1.1 Internet Of Things(Iot) 
The Internet of Things (IoT) represents a comprehensive 
environment in which different appliances performs 
automatically. It is possible as these appliances are 
connected to sensors and also to Internet. It has been done 
to control and manage the different devices or appliances 
form a distance. Several developed applications of IOT 
devices have been made to make the easy life of the 
consumer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1 Internet of things 
 
These application made to use by the consumer include the 
vehicles and home automation. 
1.2 Home Automation 
There are different IOT based devices for home 
automation. In home automation the domestic appliances 
are remotely controlled by used.  
The pros of IOT enabled home automation are discussed 
here such as 
1. Better Monitoring Of Devices 
Using IOT devices there is no requirement of user 
intervention. Device-to- device transmission enable to the 
user to maintain the clearness in procedures. Such devices 
are used at the place where there is the similarity of jobs.  
2.  Efficient & Saves Time 
Using IOT devices the user can save the valuable time. 
Using such IOT devices it avoids the user to do the same 
jobs frequently.  The Device-to- device transmission allows 
to user to get the better efficiency. Therefore the exact 
results are obtained vastly.  
3. Saves Money 
Any 
one 
WSN 
RFID 
Embedded 
Systems 
Internet of thing 
(IOT) 
 
Any 
thing 
Any 
time 
International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT)
ISSN: 2278-0181
Published by, www.ijert.org
ENCADEMS - 2020 Conference Proceedings
Volume 8, Issue 10
Special Issue - 2020
80


--- Page 2 ---
Optimum use of energy and resources can be obtained. It is 
possible to adopt this technology. For this it is necessary to 
keep the devices under observation.  
 
 
4. Better Quality of Life 
All AI based applications are efficient to formulate our 
daily life better. Such devices are applicable to improve our 
comfort, convenience and better management. Therefore it 
is an obvious thing that the life of our will be better. 
5. Smart Environment 
A preset program could monitor opening & closing of 
windows & shades according to position of sun & wind 
flow to regulate temperature, humidity & fresh air inside 
house. We could monitor emissions from factories & 
vehicles to minimize air pollution.  
6. Health Monitoring 
The IOT based devices are also used to identify the issues 
related to the health.  Such IOT devices are applicable in 
Hospitals to provide the assistance to the doctor. As well 
as, such devices are also useful to assist the senior citizens 
as well as the disabled people. 
7. CONS of IOT 
There is no doubt that future is internet & all fields human 
beings are linked within have widespread IT & internet 
applications. But on same time we don’t expect each 
individual to be expert in IT & it poses handicap for those 
who are not related to this field & therefore such people are 
subjected to exploitations.  
 
[2] IOT ARCHITECTURE 
 
Fig 2 IOT Architecture 
 
[3]APPLICATION OF IOT 
Iot based devices are used in below given sectors such as: 
1. Smart Cities 
Some specific IOT devices are used for management of 
traffic. Some devices are applicable especially to manage 
the traffic at the time of jams, any type of accidents and at 
the raining time. The Internet of things systems is also 
applicable to monitor vibrations of buildings, bridges & 
monuments.  
2.  Home Automation 
Home automation has been known as a process. This 
process has been performed to control the home devices. It 
is possible to use several devices which are IOT based. 
Electrical as well as the electronic devices are used in 
home. Such devices are may be fan, lights, and outdoor 
lights. Fire alarm, kitchen timer, etc are also smart devices.  
3. Industrial Automation 
Using the IOT devices it is easy to manage the record with 
the chain of supply. When such devices do not work 
properly, it is necessary to repair and maintain them. Using 
such monitor production of toxic gases, it is easy to 
eliminate the chances of workers' health and environment. 
 4. Health Monitoring 
There are different types of devices. Such devices are 
capable to deal with the patterns of heart rate, digestive 
system, blood pressure etc. These systems are efficient to 
monitor and diagnose such diseases.   
 
Fig 3 IOT Services 
5. Smart Environment 
Using the IOT devices it is easy to capture the releasing of 
dangerous chemicals. Such chemicals are mixed up in 
rivers and sea. Thus the water pollution has been made.  
Therefore it is essential to overcome such type of pollution. 
Such IOT systems are used in some specific sectors. The 
reason here are a number of applications that come under 
the IOT technology. Such fields are described below: 
 
[4] REVIEW OF LITERATURE 
There are several researches related to home Automation 
Platform using IOT device. Along with this in the past, the 
research on the IOT has been made along with the study on 
various applications of internet of things. The growth of 
Internet of Things (IOT) in future is totally depending upon 
us.  
Ahmed ElShafee(2012) 
This paper has presented a design and prototype 
implementation of new home automation system that uses 
WiFi technology as a network infrastructure connecting its 
parts.  
Hence they concluded that the required goals and 
objectives of home automation system have been achieved. 
The system design and architecture were discussed, and 
prototype presents the basic level of home appliance 
control. and remote monitoring has been implemented. 
Finally, their system is better from the scalability and 
flexibility point of view than the commercially available 
home automation system[1]. 
Vinay sagar K (2015)  
This system is designed to be low cost and expandable 
allowing a variety of devices to be controlle. The home 
automation 
using 
Internet 
of 
Things 
has 
been 
experimentally proven to work satisfactorily by connecting 
simple appliances to it and the appliances were successfully 
controlled remotely through internet. [2] 
International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT)
ISSN: 2278-0181
Published by, www.ijert.org
ENCADEMS - 2020 Conference Proceedings
Volume 8, Issue 10
Special Issue - 2020
81


--- Page 3 ---
Neha Malik(2017) 
The author discusses the various intelligent home 
automation system and technologies. The effort targeted on 
home automation concept where the controlling and 
monitoring operations are expediting through smart 
devices.[3] 
Shaikh Amreen(2017) 
They have discussed about architecture of home 
automation system. Also explained how internet of things 
are used for monitoring regular domestic conditions by 
sensing systems.[4] 
AnuragTiwari et al.(2017) 
The authors reviewed the Challenges and Ongoing 
Researches for IOT. The IOT systems are very common 
and are widespread. Therefore chances of security and 
privacy problems have become regular. Due to this all the 
things which are associated with internet may face safety 
issues. Due to the issue which is related to security and 
privacy IOT could not set himself as a reliable 
technology.[5] 
Satish Palaniappan(2015) 
Homes can be interfaced with sensors including motion 
sensors, light sensors and temperature sensors and provide 
automated toggling of devices based on conditions. More 
energy can be conserved by ensuring occupation of the 
house before turning on devices and checking brightness 
and turning off lights if not necessary. The system can be 
integrated closely with home security solutions to allow 
greater control and safety for home owners. The next step 
would be to extend this system to automate a large scale 
environment, such as offices and factories.[6] 
 
[5] IOT TECHNOLOGY & PROTOCOLS 
Several Communication Protocols and Technology used in 
the internet of Things. Some of the major IoT technology 
and 
protocol 
(IoT 
Communication 
Protocols) 
are 
Bluetooth, Wifi, Radio Protocols, LTE-A, and WiFi-Direct. 
These IoT communication protocols cater to and meet the 
specific functional requirement of an IoT system. 
A. Bluetooth 
An important short-range IoT communications Protocols / 
Technology. Bluetooth, which has become very important 
in computing and many consumer product markets. It is 
expected to be key for wearable products in particular, 
again connecting to the IoT albeit probably via a 
smartphone in many cases. The new Bluetooth Low-
Energy (BLE) – or Bluetooth Smart, as it is now branded – 
is a significant protocol for IoT applications. Importantly, 
while it offers a similar range to Bluetooth it has been 
designed to offer significantly reduced power consumption.  
B. Zigbee 
ZigBee is similar to Bluetooth and is majorly used in 
industrial settings. It has some significant advantages in 
complex systems offering low-power operation, high 
security, robustness and high and is well positioned to take 
advantage of wireless control and sensor networks in IoT 
applications. The latest version of ZigBee is the recently 
launched 3.0, which is essentially the unification of the 
various ZigBee wireless standards into a single standard. 
C. Z-Wave 
Z-Wave is a low-power RF communications IoT 
technology that primarily design for home automation for 
products such as lamp controllers and sensors among many 
other devices. A Z-Wave uses a simpler protocol than some 
others, which can enable faster and simpler development, 
but the only maker of chips is Sigma Designs compared to 
multiple sources for other wireless technologies such as 
ZigBee and others.  
D. Wi-Fi 
WiFi connectivity is one of the most popular IoT 
communication protocol, often an obvious choice for many 
developers, especially given the availability of WiFi within 
the home environment within LANs. There is a wide 
existing infrastructure as well as offering fast data transfer 
and the ability to handle high quantities of data. Currently, 
the most common WiFi standard used in homes and many 
businesses is 802.11n, which offers range of hundreds of 
megabit per second, which is fine for file transfers but may 
be too power-consuming for many IoT applications. 
E. Cellular 
Any IoT application that requires operation over longer 
distances can take advantage of GSM/3G/4G cellular 
communication capabilities. While cellular is clearly 
capable of sending high quantities of data, especially for 
4G, the cost and also power consumption will be too high 
for many applications. But it can be ideal for sensor-based 
low-bandwidth-data projects that will send very low 
amounts of data over the Internet. 
F. NFC 
NFC (Near Field Communication) is an IoT technology. It 
enables 
simple 
and 
safe 
communications 
between 
electronic devices, and specifically for smartphones, 
allowing consumers to perform transactions in which one 
does not have to be physically present. It helps the user to 
access digital content and connect electronic devices. 
Essentially it extends the capability of contactless card 
technology and enables devices to share information at a 
distance that is less than 4cm. 
G. LoRaWAN 
LoRaWAN is one of popular IoT Technology, targets 
wide-area network (WAN) applications. The LoRaWAN 
design to provide low-power WANs with features 
specifically needed to support low-cost mobile secure 
communication in IoT, smart city, and industrial 
applications. Specifically meets requirements for low-
power consumption and supports large networks with 
millions and millions of devices, data rates range from 0.3 
kbps to 50 kbps.  
 
[6] CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The  IOT has a wider scope in every aspect of life. As we 
know that life of people is becoming more busy. So the use 
of IOT based appliances is increasing rapidly, because 
these devices or appliances are making our life fast and 
comfortable. There are different sector where iot based 
device are used such as Industry, commercial organisation, 
hospital, etc. Apart from the several use of IOT devices, 
these are used for home automation. Iot based home 
appliance can be easily managed from a distance. The 
International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT)
ISSN: 2278-0181
Published by, www.ijert.org
ENCADEMS - 2020 Conference Proceedings
Volume 8, Issue 10
Special Issue - 2020
82


--- Page 4 ---
concept of Artificial intelligence and internet of things can 
be combined to make life more easier and comfortable. 
 
 
 
REFERENCE 
[1] Ahmed ElShafee(2012)”Design and Implementation of a WiFi 
Based Home Automation System” International Journal of 
Computer, Electrical, Automation, Control and Information 
Engineering Vol:6, No:8, 2012 
[2] Vinay sagar K (2015) Home Automation Using Internet of 
Things International Research Journal of Engineering and 
Technology (IRJET ) 
[3] Neha Malik  and Yogita Bodwade,”Literature Review on 
Home Automation System” International Journal of Advanced 
Resesarch in Computer and Communication Engineering, 
Volume 6, 2017. 
[4] Shaikh Amreen, Londhe Nishigandha, Birhade Apeksha, 
Gaikwad Jayprakash and Kodak Priyesh,” Architecture for 
internet of things for home automation”International Journal of 
Engineering and Computer Science, Volume 6, 2017. 
[5] A. Tiwari and H. Maurya, “Challenges and Ongoing 
Researches for IOT (Internet of Things): A Review,” ,Volume 
5, no. 2, pp. 57–60, 2017. 
[6] Satish Palaniappan”Home Automation Systems - A Study”, 
Volume 116, 2015 
International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT)
ISSN: 2278-0181
Published by, www.ijert.org
ENCADEMS - 2020 Conference Proceedings
Volume 8, Issue 10
Special Issue - 2020
83
