--- Page 1 ---
COGNITIVE CONSEQUENCES OF FORCED COMPLIANCE
LEON FESTINGER AND JAMES M. CARLSMITH1
Stanford 
University
W
HAT happens to a person's private
opinion if he is forced to do or say
something contrary to that opin-
ion? Only recently has there been, any experi-
mental work related to this question. Two stud-
ies reported by Janis and King (1954; 1956)
clearly showed that, at least under some condi-
tions, the private opinion changes so as to bring
it into closer correspondence with the overt
behavior the person was forced to perform.
Specifically, they showed that if a person is
forced to improvise a speech supporting a point
of view with which he disagrees, his private
opinion moves toward the position advocated
in the speech. The observed opinion change is
greater than for persons who only hear the
speech or for persons who read a prepared
speech with emphasis solely on elocution and
manner of delivery. The authors of these two
studies explain their results mainly in terms of
mental rehearsal and thinking up new argu-
ments. Inthisway, they propose, theperson who
is forced to improvise a speech convinces
himself. They present some evidence, which is
not altogether conclusive, in support of this
explanation. We will have more to say con-
cerning this explanation in discussing the
results of our experiment.
Kelrnan (1953) tried to pursue the matter
further. He reasoned that if the person is
induced to make an overt statement contrary
to his private opinion by the offer of some
reward, then the greater the reward offered,
the greater should be the subsequent opinion
change. His data, however, did not support
this idea. He found, rather, that a large reward
produced less subsequent opinion change than
did a smaller reward. Actually, this finding by
Kelman is consistent with the theory we will
outline below but, for a number of reasons, is
1 The experiment reported here was done as part of
a program of research supported by a grant from the
National Science Foundation to the senior author. We
wish to thank Leonard Hommel, Judson Mills, and
Robert Tenvilliger for their help in designing and
carrying out the experiment. We would also like to
acknowledge the help of Ruth Smith and Marilyn M.
Miller.
not conclusive. One of the major weaknesses of
the data is that not all subjects in the experi-
ment made an overt statement contrary to
their private opinion in order to obtain the
offered reward. What is more, as one might
expect, the percentage of subjects who com-
plied increased as the size of the offered reward
increased. Thus, with self-selection of who
did and who did not make the required overt
statement and with varying percentages of
subjects in the different conditions who did
make the required statement, no interpreta-
tion of the data can be unequivocal.
Recently, Festinger (1957) proposed a theory
concerning cognitive dissonance from which
come a number of derivations about opinion
change following forced compliance. Since
these derivations are stated in detail by Fest-
inger (1957, Ch. 4), we will here give only a
brief outline of the reasoning.
Let us consider a person who privately holds
opinion "X" but has, as a result of pressure
brought to bear on him, publicly stated that
he believes "not X."
1. This person has two cognitions which,
psychologically, do not fit together: one of
these is the knowledge that he believes "X,"
the other the knowledge that he has publicly
stated that he believes "not X." If no factors
other than his private opinion are considered, it
would follow, at least in our culture, that if
he believes "X" he would publicly state "X."
Hence, his cognition of his private belief is
dissonant with his cognition concerning his
actual public statement.
2. Similarly, the knowledge that he has said
"not X" is consonant with (does fit together
with) those cognitive elements corresponding
to the reasons, pressures, promises of rewards
and/or threats of punishment which induced
him to say "not X."
3. In evaluating the total magnitude of
dissonance, one must take account of both
dissonances and consonances. Let us think of
the sum of all the dissonances involving some
particular cognition as "D" and the sum of
all the consonances as "C." Then we might
203


--- Page 2 ---
204
LEON FESTINGER AND JAMES M. CARLSMITH
think of the total magnitude of dissonance as
being a function of "D" divided by "D" plus
"C."
Let us then see what can be said about the
total magnitude of dissonance in a person
created by the knowledge that he said "not X"
and really believes "X." With everything else
held constant, this total magnitude of disso-
nance would decrease as the number and
importance of the pressures which induced
him to say "not X" increased.
Thus, if the overt behavior was brought
about by, say, offers of reward or threats of
punishment, the magnitude of dissonance is
maximal if these promised rewards or threat-
ened punishments were just barely sufficient
to induce the person to say "not X." From
this point on, as the promised rewards or
threatened punishment become larger, the
magnitude of dissonance becomes smaller.
4. One way in which the dissonance can be
reduced is for the person to change his private
opinion so as to bring it into correspondence
with what he has said. One would conse-
quently expect to observe such opinion change
after a person has been forced or induced to say
something contrary to his private opinion.
Furthermore, since the pressure to reduce
dissonance will be a function of the magnitude
of the dissonance, the observed opinion change
should be greatest when the pressure used to
elicit the overt behavior is just sufficient to
doit.
The present experiment was designed to
test this derivation under controlled, labora-
tory conditions. In the experiment we varied
the amount of reward used to force persons to
make a statement contrary to their private
views. The prediction [from 3 and 4 above] is
that the larger the reward given to the subject,
the smaller will be the subsequent opinion
change,
PROCEDURE
Seventy-one male students in the introduc-
tory psychology course at Stanford University
were used in the experiment. In this course,
students are required to spend a certain num-
ber of hours as subjects (Ss) in experiments.
They choose among the available experiments
by signing their names on a sheet posted on the
bulletin board which states the nature of the
experiment. The present experiment was listed
as a two-hour experiment dealing with " Meas-
ures of Performance."
During the first week of the course, when the
requirement of serving in experiments was
announced and explained to the students, the
instructor also told them about a study that
the psychology department was conducting.
He explained that, since they were required to
serve in experiments, the department was con-
ducting a study to evaluate these experiments
in order to be able to improve them in the
future. They were told that a sample of
students would be interviewed after having
served as 5s. They were urged to cooperate in
these interviews by being completely frank
and honest. The importance of this announce-
ment will become clear shortly. It enabled us to
measure the opinions of our 5s in a context not
directly connected with our experiment and in
which we could reasonably expect frank and
honest expressions of opinion.
When the S arrived for the experiment on
"Measures of Performance" he had to wait for
a few minutes in the secretary's office. The
experimenter (E) then came in, introduced
himself to the 5 and, together, they walked
into the laboratory room where the E said:
This experiment usually takes a little over an hour
but, of course, we had to schedule it for two hours.
Since we have that extra time, the introductory psy-
chology people asked if they could interview some of
our subjects. [Offhand and conversationally.] Did they
announce that in class? I gather that they're interview-
ing some people who have been In experiments. I don't
know much about it. Anyhow, they may want to inter-
view you when you're through here.
With no further introduction or explanation
the S was shown the first task, which involved
putting 12 spools onto a tray, emptying the
tray, refilling it with spools, and so on. He was
told to use one hand and to work at his own
speed. He did this for one-half hour. The E
then removed the tray and spools and placed
in front of the S a board containing 48 square
pegs. His task was to turn each peg a quarter
turn clockwise, then another quarter turn, and
so on. He was told again to use one hand and
to work at his own speed. The 5 worked at this
task for another half hour.
While the 5 was working on these tasks, the
E sat, with a stop watch in his hand, busily
making notations on a sheet of paper. He did
so in order to make it convincing that this was


--- Page 3 ---
COGNITIVE CONSFCQUJCNCES 01:' FORCED CoMl'JJANCK
205
what the E was interested in and that these
tasks, and how the S worked on them, was the
total experiment. From our point of view the
experiment had hardly started. The hour which
the S spent working on the repetitive, monot-
onous tasks was intended to provide, for each
S uniformly, an experience about which he
would have a somewhat negative opinion.
After the half hour on the second task was
over, the E conspicuously set the stop watch
back to zero, put it away, pushed his chair
back, lit a cigarette, and said:
O.K. Well, that's all we have in the experiment
itself. I'd like to explain what this has been all about
so you'll have some idea of why you were doing this.
[E pauses.] Well, the way the experiment is set up is this.
There are actually two groups in the experiment. In
one, the group you were in, we bring the subject in
and give him essentially no introduction to the experi-
ment. That is, all we tell him is what he needs to know
in order to do the tasks, and he has no idea of what the
experiment is all about, or what it's going to be like,
or anything like that. But in the other group, we have
a student that we've hired that works for us regularly,
and what I do is take him into the next room where the
subject is waiting—the same room you were waiting in
before—and I introduce him as if he had just finished
being a subject in the experiment. That is, I say: "This
is so-and-so, who's just finished the experiment, and
I've asked him to tell you a little of what it's about
before you start." The fellow who works for us then,
in conversation with the next subject, makes these
points: [The E then produced a sheet headed "For
Group B" which had written on it: It was very enjoy-
able, I had a lot of fun, I enjoyed myself, it was very
interesting, it was intriguing, it was exciting. The E
showed this to the S and then proceeded with his false
explanation of the purpose of the experiment.] Now, of
course, we have this student do this, because if the
experimenter does it, it doesn't look as realistic, and
what we're interested in doing is comparing how these
two groups do on the experiment—the one with this
previous expectation about the experiment, and the
other, like yourself, with essentially none.
Up to this point the procedure was identical
for 5s in all conditions. From this point on they
diverged somewhat. Three conditions were
run, Control, One Dollar, and Twenty Dollars,
as follows:
Control Condition
The E continued:
Is that fairly clear? [Pause.] Look, that fellow [looks
at watch] I was telling you about from the introductory
psychology class said he would get here a couple of
minutes from now. Would you mind waiting to see if
he wants to talk to you? Fine. Why don't we go into
the other room to wait? [The E left the 5 in the secre-
tary's office for four minutes. He then returned and
said:] O.K. Let's check and see if he does want to talk
to you.
One and Twenty Dollar Conditions
The E continued:
Is that fairly clear how it is set up and what we're
trying to do? [Pause.] Now, I also have a sort of strange
thing to ask you. The thing is this. [Long pause, some
confusion and uncertainty in the following, with a de-
gree of embarrassment on the part of the E. The
manner of the E contrasted strongly with the preceding
unhesitant and assured false explanation of the experi-
ment. The point was to make it seem to the S that this
was the first time the E had done this and that he felt
unsure of himself.] The fellow who normally does this
for us couldn't do it today—he just phoned in, and
something or other came up for him—so we've been
looking around for someone that we could hire to do it
for us. You see, we've got another subject waiting
[looks at watch] who is supposed to be in that other
condition. Now Professor 
-, who is in charge of
this experiment, suggested that perhaps we could take
a chance on your doing it for us. I'll tell you what we
had in mind: the thing is, if you could do it for us now,
then of course you would know how to do it, and if
something like this should ever come up again, that is,
the regular fellow couldn't make it, and we had a sub-
ject scheduled, it would be very reassuring to us to
know that we had somebody else we could call on who
knew how to do it. So, if you would be willing to do
this for us, we'd like to hire you to do it now and then
be on call in the future, if something like this should
ever happen again. We can pay you a dollar (twenty
dollars) for doing this for us, that is, for doing it now
and then being on call. Do you think you could do that
for us?
If the 5 hesitated, the E said things like, "It
will only take a few minutes," "The regular
person is pretty reliable; this is the first time
he has missed," or "If we needed you we could
phone you a day or two in advance; if you
couldn't make it, of course, we wouldn't expect
you to come." After the S agreed to do it, the
E gave him the previously mentioned sheet
of paper headed "For Group B" and asked
him to read it through again. The E then paid
the S one dollar (twenty dollars), made out a
hand-written receipt form, and asked the 5
to sign it. He then said:
O.K., the way we'll do it is this. As I said, the next
subject should be here by now. I think the next one is
a girl. I'll take you into the next room and introduce
you to her, saying that you've just finished the experi-
ment and that we've asked you to tell her a little
about it. And what we want you to do is just sit down
and get into a conversation with her and try to get


--- Page 4 ---
206
LEON FJCSTINGER AND JAMKS M. CARLSMITH
across the points on that sheet of paper. I'll leave you
alone and come back after a couple of minutes. O.K.?
The E then took the S into the secretary's
office where he had previously waited and
where the next S was waiting. (The secretary
had left the office.) He introduced the girl and
the S to one another saying that the S had
just finished the experiment and would tell her
something about it. He then left saying he
would return in a couple of minutes. The girl,
an undergraduate hired for this role, said little
until the S made some positive remarks about
the experiment and then said that she was
surprised because a friend of hers had taken
the experiment the week before and had told
her that it was boring and that she ought to
try to get out of it. Most 5s responded by
saying something like "Oh, no, it's really very
interesting. I'm sure you'll enjoy it." The girl,
after this listened quietly, accepting and
agreeing to everything the S told her. The
discussion between the J? and the girl was re-
corded on a hidden tape recorder.
After two minutes the E returned, asked the
girl to go into the experimental room, thanked
the 5 for talking to the girl, wrote down his
phone number to continue the fiction that we
might call on him again in the future and then
said: "Look, could we check and see if that
fellow from introductory psychology wants to
talk to you?"
From this point on, the procedure for all
three conditions was once more identical. As
the E and the S started to walk to the office
where the interviewer was, the E said: "Thanks
very much for working on those tasks for us.
I hope you did enjoy it. Most of our subjects
tell us afterward that they found it quite
interesting. You get a chance to see how you
react to the tasks and so forth." This short
persuasive communication was made in all
conditions in exactly the same way. The reason
for doing it, theoretically, was to make it
easier for anyone who wanted to persuade him-
self that the tasks had been, indeed, enjoyable.
When they arrived at the interviewer's
office, the E asked the interviewer whether or
not he wanted to talk to the S. The interviewer
said yes, the E shook hands with the S, said
good-bye, and left. The interviewer, of course,
was always kept in complete ignorance of
which condition the S was in. The interview
consisted of four questions, on each of which
the 5 was first encouraged to talk about the
matter and was then asked to rate his opinion
or reaction on an 11-point scale. The questions
are as follows:
1. Were the tasks interesting and enjoyable? In what
way? In what way were they not? Would you rate how
you feel about them on a scale from — S to +5 where
— 5 means they were extremely dull and boring, +5
means they were extremely interesting and enjoyable,
and zero means they were neutral, neither interesting
nor uninteresting.
2. Did the experiment give you an opportunity to
learn about your own ability to perform these tasks?
In what way? In what way not? Would you rate how
you feel about this on a scale from 0 to 10 where 0
means you learned nothing and 10 means you learned a
great deal.
3. From what you know about the experiment and
the tasks involved in it, would you say the experiment
was measuring anything important? That is, do you
think the results may have scientific value? In what
way? In what way not? Would you rate your opinion
on this matter on a scale from 0 to 10 where 0 means
the results have no scientific value or importance and
10 means they have a great deal of value and im-
portance.
4. Would you have any desire to participate in
another similar experiment? Why? Why not? Would
you rate your desire to participate in a similar experi-
ment again on a scale from — S to +5, where — S means
you would definitely dislike to participate, +5 means
you would definitely like to participate, and 0 means
you have no particular feeling about it one way or the
other.
As may be seen, the questions varied in how
directly relevant they were to what the 5 had
told the girl. This point will be discussed further
in connection with the results.
At the close of the interview the 5 was asked
what he thought the experiment was about and,
following this, was asked directly whether or
not he was suspicious of anything and, if so,
what he was suspicious of. When the interview
was over, the interviewer brought the S back
to the experimental room where the E was
waiting together with the girl who had posed
as the waiting £. (In the control condition, of
course, the girl was not there.) The true pur-
pose of the experiment was then explained to
the 5 in detail, and the reasons for each of the
various steps in the experiment were explained
carefully in relation to the true purpose. All
experimental Sk in both One Dollar and Twen-
ty Dollar conditions were asked, after this
explanation, to return the money they had


--- Page 5 ---
COGNITIVE CONSEQUENCES OF FORCED COMPLIANCE
207
been given. All Ss, without exception, were
quite willing to return the money.
The data from 11 of the 71 Ss in the experi-
ment had to be discarded for the following
reasons:
1. Five 5s (three in the One Dollar and two in the
Twenty Dollar condition) indicated in the interview
that they were suspicious about having been paid to
tell the girl the experiment was fun and suspected that
that was the real purpose of the experiment,
2. Two 5s (both in the One Dollar condition) told
the girl that they had been hired, that the experiment
was really boring but they were supposed to say it
was fun.
3. Three 5s (one in the One Dollar and two in the
Twenty Dollar condition) refused to take the money
and refused to be hired.
4. One S (in the One Dollar condition), immediately
after having talked to the girl, demanded her phone
number saying he would call her and explain things,
and also told the E he wanted to wait until she was
finished so he could tell her about it.
These 11 5s were, of course, run through the
total experiment anyhow and the experiment
was explained to them afterwards. Their data,
however, are not included in the analysis.
Summary of Design
There remain, for analysis, 20 5s in each of
the three conditions. Let us review these
briefly: 1. Control condition. These 5s were
treated identically in all respects to the 5s
in the experimental conditions, except that
they were never asked to, and never did, tell
the waiting girl that the experimental tasks
were enjoyable and lots of fun. 2. One Dollar
condition. These 5s were hired for one dollar to
tell a waiting 5 that tasks, which were really
rather dull and boring, were interesting, en-
joyable, and lots of fun, 3. Twenty Dollar cottdi-
tion. These 5s were hired for twenty dollars to
do the same thing.
RESULTS
The major results of the experiment are
summarized in Table 1 which lists, separately
for each of the three experimental conditions,
the average rating which the 5s gave at the
end of each question on the interview. We will
discuss each of the questions on the interview
separately, because they were intended to
measure different things. One other point be-
fore we proceed to examine the data. In all the
comparisons, the Control condition should be
TABLE 1
AVERAGE RATINGS ON INTERVIEW QUESTIONS FOR
EACH CONDITION
Question on Interview
How enjoyable tasks were
(rated from -5 to +5)
How 
much 
they 
learned
(rated from 0 to 10)
Scientific importance (rated
from 0 to 10)
Participate in similar exp.
(rated from —5 to +5)
Experimental Condition
Control
(,V =
20)
-.45
3.08
S.60
-.62
One
Dollar
(N = 20)
+ 1.35
2.80
6.45
+ 1.20
Twenty
Dollars
(N =
20)
-.05
3.15
S.18
-.25
regarded as a baseline from which to evaluate
the results in the other two conditions. The
Control condition gives us, essentially, the
reactions of 5s to the tasks and their opinions
about the experiment as falsely explained to
them, without the experimental introduction
of dissonance. The data from the other condi-
tions may be viewed, in a sense, as changes
from this baseline.
How Enjoyable the Tasks Were
The average ratings on this question, pre-
sented in the first row of figures in Table 1,
are the results most important to the experi-
ment. These results are the ones most directly
relevant to the specific dissonance which was
experimentally created. It will be recalled that
the tasks were purposely arranged to be
rather boring and monotonous. And, indeed,
in the Control condition the average rating
was —.45, somewhat on the negative side of
the neutral point.
In the other two conditions, however, the
5s told someone that these tasks were interest-
ing and enjoyable. The resulting dissonance
could, of course, most directly be reduced by
persuading themselves that the tasks were,
indeed, interesting and enjoyable. In the One
Dollar condition, since the magnitude of
dissonance was high, the pressure to reduce
this dissonance would also be high. In this
condition, the average rating was +1.35,
considerably on the positive side and signifi-
cantly different from the Control condition at
the .02 level2 (t = 2,48).
2 All statistical tests referred to in this paper are
two-tailed.


--- Page 6 ---
208
LEON FESTINGER AND JAMES M. CARLSMITH
In the Twenty Dollar condition, where less
dissonance was created experimentally because
of the greater importance of the consonant
relations, there is correspondingly less evidence
of dissonance reduction. The average rating in
this condition is only —.05, slightly and not
significantly higher than the Control condition.
The difference between the One Dollar and
Twenty Dollar conditions is significant at the
.03 level (t = 2,22). In short, when an S was
induced, by offer of reward, to say something
contrary to his private opinion, this private
opinion tended to change so as to correspond
more closely with what he had said. The greater
the reward offered (beyond what was necessary
to elicit the behavior) the smaller was the
effect.
Desire to Participate in a Similar Experiment
The results from this question are shown in
the last row of Table 1. This question is less
directly related to the dissonance that was
experimentally created for the 5s. Certainly,
the more interesting and enjoyable they felt
the tasks were, the greater would be their de-
sire to participate in a similar experiment. But
other factors would enter also. Hence, one
would expect the results on this question to
be very similar to the results on "how enjoy-
able the tasks were" but weaker. Actually, the
result, as may be seen in the table, are in
exactly the same direction, and the magnitude
of the mean differences is fully as large as on
the first question. The variability is greater,
however, and the differences do not yield high
levels of statistical significance. The difference
between the One Dollar condition (+1.20)
and the Control condition (— .62) is significant
at the .08 level (t = 1.78). The difference
between the One Dollar condition and the
Twenty Dollar condition (—.25) reaches only
the .15 level of significance (t = 1.46).
The Scientific Importance of the Experiment
This question was included because there
was a chance that differences might emerge.
There are, after all, other ways in which the
experimentally created dissonance could be
reduced. For example, one way would be for
the S to magnify for himself the value of the
reward he obtained. This, however, was un-
likely in this experiment because money was
used for the reward and it is undoubtedly
difficult to convince oneself that one dollar is
more than it really is. There is another pos-
sible way, however. The 5s were given a very
good reason, in addition to being paid, for
saying what they did to the waiting girl. The
5s were told it was necessary for the experi-
ment. The dissonance could, consequently, be
reduced by magnifying the importance of this
cognition. The more scientifically important
they considered the experiment to be, the less
was the total magnitude of dissonance. It is
possible, then, that the results on this ques-
tion, shown in the third row of figures in Table
1, might reflect dissonance reduction.
The results are weakly in line with what one
would expect if the dissonance were somewhat
reduced in this manner. The One Dollar condi-
tion is higher than the other two. The differ-
ence between the One and Twenty Dollar
conditions reaches the .08 level of significance
on a two-tailed test (t = 1.79). The difference
between the One Dollar and Control conditions
is not impressive at all (t = 1.21). The result
that the Twenty Dollar condition is actually
lower than the Control condition is un-
doubtedly a matter of chance (t = 0.58).
How Much They Learned From the Experiment
The results on this question are shown in the
second row of figures in Table 1. The question
was included because, as far as we could see, it
had nothing to do with the dissonance that
was experimentally created and could not be
used for dissonance reduction. One would then
expect no differences at all among the three
conditions. We felt it was important to show
that the effect was not a completely general
one but was specific to the content of the dis-
sonance which was created. As can be readily
seen in Table 1, there are only negligible differ-
ences among conditions. The highest t value for
any of these differences is only 0.48.
DISCUSSION OF A POSSIBLE ALTERNATIVE
EXPLANATION
We mentioned in the introduction that
Janis and King (1954; 1956) in explaining their
findings, proposed an explanation in terms of
the self-convincing effect of mental rehearsal


--- Page 7 ---
COGNITIVE CONSEQUENCES OF FORCED COMPLIANCE
209
and thinking up new arguments by the person
who had to improvise a speech. Kelman (1953),
in the previously mentioned study, in at-
tempting to explain the unexpected finding
that the persons who complied in the moderate
reward condition changed their opinion more
than in the high reward condition, also pro-
posed the same kind of explanation. If the
results of our experiment are to be taken as
strong corroboration of the theory of cogni-
tive dissonance, this possible alternative
explanation must be dealt with.
Specifically, as applied to our results, this
alternative explanation would maintain that
perhaps, for some reason, the 5s in the One
Dollar condition worked harder at telling the
waiting girl that the tasks were fun and en-
joyable. That is, in the One Dollar condition
they may have rehearsed it more mentally,
thought up more ways of saying it, may have
said it more convincingly, and so on. Why this
might have been the case is, of course, not
immediately apparent. One might expect that,
in the Twenty Dollar condition, having been
paid more, they would try to do a better job
of it than in the One Dollar condition. But
nevertheless, the possibility exists that the 5s
in the One Dollar condition may have impro-
vised more.
Because of the desirability of investigating
this possible alternative 
explanation, we
recorded on a tape recorder the conversation
between each S and the girl. These recordings
were transcribed and then rated, by two
independent raters, on five dimensions. The
ratings were, of course done in ignorance of
which condition each S was in, The relia-
bilities of these ratings, that is, the correlations
between the two independent raters, ranged
from .61 to .88, with an average reliability of
.71. The five ratings were:
1. The content of what the 5 said before
the girl made the remark that her friend told
her it was boring. The stronger the S's positive
statements about the tasks, and the more ways
in which he said they were interesting and
enjoyable, the higher the rating.
2. The content of what the S said after the
girl made the above-mentioned remark. This
was rated in the same way as for the content
before the remark.
3. A similar rating of the over-all content of
what the S said.
4. A rating of how persuasive and convincing
the S was in what he said and the way in which
he said it.
5. A rating of the amount of time in the dis-
cussion that the 5 spent discussing the tasks
as opposed to going off into irrelevant things.
The mean ratings for the One Dollar and
Twenty Dollar conditions, averaging the rat-
ings of the two independent raters, are pre-
sented in Table 2. It is clear from examing the
table that, in all cases, the Twenty Dollar
condition is slightly higher. The differences
are small, however, and only on the rating of
"amount of time" does the difference between
the two conditions even approach significance.
We are certainly justified in concluding that
the Ss in the One Dollar condition did not
improvise more nor act more convincingly.
Hence, the alternative explanation discussed
above cannot account for the findings.
SUMMARY
Recently, Festinger (1957) has proposed a
theory concerning cognitive dissonance. Two
derivations from this theory are tested here.
These are:
1. If a person is induced to do or say some-
thing which is contrary to his private opinion,
there will be a tendency for him to change his
opinion so as to bring it into correspondence
with what he has done or said.
2. The larger the pressure used to elicit the
TABLE 2
AVERAGE RATINGS or DISCUSSION BETWEEN SUBJECT
AND GIRL
Dimension Rated
Content before remark by girl
(rated from 0 to 5)
Content after remark by girl
(rated from 0 to 5)
Over-all content (rated from 0
to 5)
Persuasiveness and conviction
(rated from 0 to 10)
Time spent on topic (rated from
0 to 10)
Condition
One
Dollar
2.26
1.63
1.89
4.79
6.74
Twenty
Dollars
2.62
1.75
2.19
5.50
8.19
Value
o f /
1.08
0.11
1.08
0.99
1.80


--- Page 8 ---
210
LEON FESTINGER AND JAMES M. CAELSMITH
overt behavior (beyond the minimum needed
to elicit it) the weaker will be the above-
mentioned tendency.
A laboratory experiment was designed to
test these derivations. Subjects were subjected
to a boring experience and then paid to tell
someone that the experience had been interest-
ing and enjoyable. The amount of money paid
the subject was varied. The private opinions
of the subjects concerning the experiences
were then determined.
The results strongly corroborate the theory
that was tested.
REFERENCES
FESTINGER, L. A theory of cognitive d-issonattce. Evans-
ton, 111: Row Peterson, 19S7.
JANIS, I. L., & KING, B. T. The influence of role-playing
on opinion change. /. dbnorm. sac. Psychol., 1954,
49, 211-218.
KELITAN, H. Attitude change as a function of response
restriction. Hum. Relal., 1953, 6, 185-214.
KING, B. T., & JANIS, I. L. Comparison of the effective-
ness of improvised versus non-improvised role-
playing in producing opinion changes. Hum.
Relat., 1956, 9, 177-186.
Received November 18, 1957.
