--- Page 1 ---
A Comparative Study of Machine Learning 
Algorithms for Credit Card Fraud Detection 
 
 
1st Mohammad Aburass 
Management Information Systems 
Department 
Al-Zaytoonah University of Jordan 
Amman, Jordan 
mohaburass97@gmail.com 
2nd Rehab Aburass 
Software Enginnering Department  
Al-Zaytoonah University of Jordan 
Amman, Jordan 
rehab.aburass@zuj.edu.jo 
3rd Marwa Hamza 
Computer Science Department  
Al-Zaytoonah University of Jordan 
Amman, Jordan 
Marwa.hamza@zuj.edu.jo 
Abstract—This paper explores the relationship between 
machine learning (ML) algorithms-based fraud detection 
techniques and the accuracy of identifying fraudulent credit 
card transactions. Credit cards serve as a main role-player in 
the digital era to meet different financial needs, creating a 
crucial demand for efficient fraud detection techniques to 
protect both consumers and financial institutions. These 
companies require consistent fraud detection systems to ensure 
consumers can safely use their credit cards to purchase goods, 
rent properties, or make loan payments. The study aims to 
separate fraudulent transactions from genuine ones by 
employing machine learning techniques including Random 
Forest, Decision Trees, Adaptive Boosting, and Gradient 
Boosting to evaluate credit card transaction data. To improve 
fraud detection accuracy, the prediction models assess accuracy, 
precision, recall, and F1 score. Using European credit card data, 
this paper evaluates several machine-learning techniques to 
identify the most successful approach in accurately detecting 
fraudulent transactions. 
Keywords—Credit 
Cards 
Fraud, 
Machine 
Learning 
Algorithms, Prediction, Confusion matrix. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Financial transactions with Credit Cards are on the rise as 
a dominant method of payment both online and offline, Credit 
card fraud detection has become a critical challenge in the 
digital payment era, with global losses projected to reach $43 
billion by 2026 [1]. While machine learning (ML) could 
provide promising answers, current research [5], [10] does not 
assess ensemble approaches on the class imbalanced real-
world datasets, a gap this work seeks to address. 
A. Key Challenges 
Some of the challenges this study faced are:   
• 
Imbalanced Data: Model training is made more 
difficult by the fact that fraud instances only make up 
0.172 percent of transactions [4]. 
• 
Operational Trade-offs: High false positives (FP) 
creates a pressure on banks with unnecessary alerts, 
while false negatives (FN) enable fraud [2]. 
B. Study Contribution 
• 
Comparative Analysis: We evaluate Random Forest, 
AdaBoost, Gradient Boosting, and Decision Trees on 
a European cardholder dataset, using SMOTE to 
address class imbalance. 
• 
Practical Focus: Minimizing FP (for example Random 
Forest reduces FP by 85% when compared with 
AdaBoost) for deployed algorithms. 
C. Study Objectives 
• 
Benchmarking ML algorithms for fraud detection. 
• 
Propose a model balancing precision (security) and 
recall (usability). 
II. 
RESEARCH 
A. Study Problem 
First, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) received 
416,582 reports in 2023 about Credit Cards fraud, making it 
one of the most common types of fraud,  However, that 
statistic does not provide a whole picture of the global issue 
since the cited reports show that the information about the 
individuals was misused whether applying for a new credit 
card or carrying an existing one. Regardless of where fraud 
happens either from cardholder abuse or criminal attacks, 
there is a result leading to more chargebacks, lost revenue, and 
threats to the business. 
It is a fact that Credit Cards are now a daily life 
requirement to carry out most typical actions associated with 
it, and due to their significance as a service they cannot be just 
neglected, and the financial industry recognizes this need, so 
multiple efforts are being presented to fight the risks that 
correspond with it. Using many techniques and technologies, 
credit card fraud prevention protects clients against identity 
theft and fraudulent behavior.   The exponential growth in data 
and the notable rise in card transactions in recent years have 
greatly shifted credit fraud detection toward digitalization and 
automation. Advanced solutions for credit card fraud 
detection utilize artificial intelligence and machine learning to 
analyze data, predict possible fraud, enhance decision-
making, generate warnings, and manage individual fraud 
cases, serving as a vital component in the business. 
B. Study Aims 
The aims of this study are: 
• 
Testing existing machine algorithms that detect Credit 
Cards fraud. 
• 
Ensure payment integrity by optimizing FP/FN trade-
offs. 
• 
A comparison between the machine learning 
algorithms used in this study via precision, recall, and 
F1-score. 
C. Study Significance 
The use of machine learning algorithms can detect fraud, 
by classifying transactions as fraud or genuine, which 
provides a breakthrough with the results showing how each 
2025 12th International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT)
201
979-8-3315-0894-4/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
2025 12th International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT) | 979-8-3315-0894-4/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICIT64950.2025.11049254
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Florida. Downloaded on December 29,2025 at 23:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 2 ---
algorithm can be used for credit fraud detection at high 
accuracy, ensuring the security of the bank payment system. 
This foresight is critical to stay ahead of ever-evolving 
cybercriminal tactics that constantly seek to bypass existing 
defenses. 
Our work enables banks to: 
• 
Reduce false alarms (for example Random Forest’s 
precision: 0.857). 
• 
Adapt to evolving fraud tactics through ML-driven 
detection. 
III. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Credit Cards 
The card is a plastic card issued to be held by the users 
allowing authorized users to do their financial transactions, 
and later on, pay for them, according to United States Credit 
Cards statistics published on the Statista website, between 
2012 and 2018 the number of Credit Cards reached 1.1 trillion 
surpassing the number of debit cards by three times, with Visa 
being the largest Credit Cards issuer [6]. The use of Credit 
Cards has become more common in different aspects of life 
such as shopping, paying bills, and online transactions. 
However, along with this increase, the risk of fraud is rising 
[7]. 
B. Credit Cards fraud 
This can be defined as the use of Credit Cards information 
for malicious activities without the approval of the card 
owner, or the bank's knowledge at that time with permission 
to access their funds through various ways causing financial 
loss, and risk for businesses and banks, using fraud detection 
systems this can be prevented, such as using machine learning 
algorithms. 
C. Artificial intelligence 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the science and engineering 
of making intelligent machines learn like somewhat human 
beings do. AI is a broad term that includes both ML and deep 
learning, AI is divided into symbolic intelligence and 
computational intelligence, with symbolic intelligence being 
the one that uses predefined rules and logic to process 
information, while computational intelligence is based on 
learning and adaptation from data [8]. 
D. Machine Learning 
Since the dawn of time, humans have been using various 
tools to acquire data and use it further to evolve this creativity 
led to the invention of machines, to further evolve they needed 
to teach machines how to use data so they developed the 
machine learning concept to grant the ability for computers to 
learn without being given exact programming commands but 
rather through learning, and relying on algorithms, training the 
computer to reach higher and better accuracy results by trial 
and error, this interest in MI comes from the ability to make 
patterns and models that can assist in almost all life situation; 
with no single algorithm that fits all; MI includes Supervised 
and unsupervised learning [9]. 
People prefer digital and paperless transactions using 
Credit Card transactions increasing their popularity, and all of 
these transactions are subjected to fraud. So, to detect fraud 
researchers analyzed this data, where a model was designed 
and developed using machine learning. A comparison was 
made among the machine-learning algorithms that were used 
to select the best model for fraud detection and 
identification[10]. 
A study that deals with the un-even dataset mentions that 
in order to stay away from the noise in the data, it proposes a 
non-overlapped risk-based bagging ensemble (NRBE) mixed 
with a misrepresentation location framework creating a 
model. The model broke all the irregularities in the dataset and 
its non-vital nature. Eradicating the problem of imbalanced 
data, as for the noisiness created in the transactions it was 
destroyed by Naïve Bayes. The model proposed was beaten 
by a score of 5% in BCR and BER, half that in the recall, and 
decreased expense to fraud detection by about 2x to 2.5 by 
using the NBRE, clearing that the NBRE model is best for 
dynamic business techniques for fraud detection[11].  
Another study with a performance analysis of machine 
learning algorithms cleared that the transactions made with 
Credit Cards that are classified as fraudulent or legitimate are 
mainly a binary classification. That is how data mining 
classification comprises such fraud problems. Some other 
techniques also come in handy with data mining for fraud 
detection such as Web-services-based collaborative schemes 
to enable private sectors such as banks to share information 
about fraud frequencies and patterns to enhance the detection 
process, reducing the financial loss. The study simplifies the 
basic procedure that was used in the study to develop the 
Machine Learning algorithms as shown in Fig. 1 [12]. 
 
Fig. 1. The flow process diagram for developing a machine learning 
algorithm. 
E. Machine Learning in Credit Cards fraud Detection 
As challenging as it sounds, it is very tedious and 
important to find ways to detect fraud at an early stage and 
help prevent it. As the name itself implies when a need to 
detect whether a Credit Cards transaction was done by the 
owner or a fraudulent one accurately. Most models tend to 
identify as false positives meaning even the transactions that 
were done by the owner would be identified as fraudulent 
ones. Because of that data needs to be available for training as 
machine learning methods are the main tool for such concerns 
with their different types. Some of the most common 
algorithms used in fraud detection include Support Vector 
2025 12th International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT)
202
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Florida. Downloaded on December 29,2025 at 23:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 3 ---
Machine (SVM), Decision Tree, Random Forest, XGBoost, k-
Nearest Neighbors (kNN), Principal Component Analysis 
(PCA), and AdaBoost. 
F. Credit Cards Fraud Patterns 
Common methods of Credit Cards fraud include[6],[14]: 
• 
Stolen or misplaced cards 
• 
Data breaches 
• 
Electronic or manual Credit Cards imprints 
• 
Triangulation  
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
Arthur Samuel in his talk about Machine learning defined 
it as the field of study that gives the ability to computers to 
learn without explicitly programming it, through his famous 
checkers playing program. Machine learning is considered a 
way to teach machines how to handle data, interpret it, and 
extract information. Since machine learning relies on different 
algorithms to solve problems, each algorithm needs to be 
employed depending on the problem [15]. 
A. Machine Learning Algorithms 
The Algorithms that were used as follows: 
 
Random Forest: An ensemble learning method that 
combines multiple decision trees to improve 
predictivity and accuracy. 
 
Decision Tree: A predictive model shaped like a tree 
for classification or regression tasks. 
 
AdaBoost: An ensemble learning method that 
combines weak classifiers to form a strong classifier. 
 
Gradient Boosting: An ensemble learning method that 
builds decision trees sequentially to correct errors 
from previous models. 
 
1. Random Forest 
There are two kinds of random forests based on their 
classifiers, to differentiate between them an example is given 
below, where the dataset is described as D with n examples 
(i.e., |D| = n): 
 
 = ,	
,  = 1, … ,  
(1) 
where xi ∈ X is an instance in the m-dimensional feature 
space  
 
 = ,  … ,  
(2) 
and yi ∈ Y = {0, 1} is the class label associated with 
instance xi; and named as: 
• 
Random forest based on random trees 
• 
Random forest based on CART 
But for this investigation, we used a random forest based 
on a random tree, which is just a random decision tree inserted. 
 
 Whereas the replacement samples are chosen at random 
from the trained set. Next, at each internal node, a subset of 
characteristics is chosen at random, and the centers of each 
class are calculated in the data's current node. Then, class 0 
and class 1 centers are denoted by Left Center and Right 
Center, respectively. The kth element of a center can be found 
using the following formulas: 
 
[] =

 ∑
 !

"
( = 0) 
(3) 
 
&ℎ[] =

 ∑
 !

"
( = 1) 
(4) 
 
((, ()*) = ∑
|([] −()*[]| 
∈/01
 (5) 
2. Decision Tree 
Even though that decision tree can be combined with other 
models to form an Ensemble Learning to enhance 
performance, this study used the basic form of the decision 
tree, and the algorithm itself still holds various techniques to 
increase the performance of the model, such as the use of 
Pruning techniques or Feature Selection, according for this 
study the technique handled was the Explicit Feature 
Selection; Decision trees mostly use Inherent Feature 
Selection; however, explicit features are ones like Recursive 
Feature Elimination (RFE) or when using domain knowledge 
which pre-determines features that can further improve model 
performance if they are relevant [16].  
In short, the reduction of the dimensionality in a dataset is 
for feature selection, resulting in a simplified model with less 
power or fewer computational requirements and overfitting 
risk being reduced than a normal one [16]. 
3. AdaBoost 
In the approach of AdaBoost, most of the time it is often 
combined with decision trees, in this study, the ensemble 
AdaBoost algorithm was used in conjunction with decision 
tree classifiers which also use the feature selection method to 
reduce noise and focus on the predictive attributes, then the 
results are combined by using a weighted sum, which 
represents the combined result of the boosted classifier, as 
shown below: 
 
23() = ∑
4()
3
4"
 
(6) 
The weak learner in this scenario, 4 is recognized as a 
classifier and provides a prediction class based on input x. 
Each training sample is given an output prediction, ℎ(), by 
every weak learner. We select a weak learner at iteration t and 
add a coefficient, 54, to it so that the final t-stage boosted 
classifier minimizes the sum of training errors, 64. 
 
64 = ∑6[247() + 54ℎ()]

 
(7) 
Where 47() considered the boosted classifier that was 
built in the stage before, E (F) is an error function, and 4() =
54ℎ() is the weal learner, which will be taken for the final 
classifier in consideration. AdaBoost favors misclassified data 
samples to teach weak learners. It is worth noticing the 
algorithm itself is sensitive to noise and outliers, as long as the 
performance of the classifier is not randomized, it will be able 
to increase the performance of individual results by using 
different algorithms. 
 
4. Gradient Boosting 
Along the flexibility it holds in handling imbalanced data, 
this makes it a great algorithm for this study to handle the high 
dimensional dataset and the possible skewed nature of the 
2025 12th International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT)
203
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Florida. Downloaded on December 29,2025 at 23:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 4 ---
dataset. A hyperparameter tunning can be required to reach the 
highest performance, alongside the number of estimators, 
learning rate, and tree depth. 
The gradient Boosting Classifier used in this study used the 
following methodology to improve the model's effectiveness: 
• 
Sequential Learning: Where weak learners in this 
study are trained to correct the errors of the previous 
model generated since each model built learns the 
mistakes of the previous one and focuses on the 
residual output (errors) [17]. 
• 
Feature Importance: a measure or a score that helps 
identify the attributes that affect predictions the most, 
their importance is calculated based on the ability to 
reduce the impurity of the dataset. [18]. 
• 
Weighted Learning: The misclassified data points 
gain more weight to make sure that the next learner 
focuses on them, this is identified as an iterative 
learning mechanism, allowing to switch the focus of 
the next model on correcting those data points’ errors. 
Improving classification accuracy, in the case of 
imbalanced data [19]. 
B. Data Preprocessing and Performance Metrics 
The dataset used contains 284807 records obtained from 
Kaggle website, representing the transactions made by credit 
cards in September 2013 by European cardholders. The 
dataset is highly imbalanced being skewed, due to only 
0.172% of fraud cases that were recorded in the dataset. To 
balance the dataset SMOTE technique was used to generate 
synthetic samples for the minority class. 
Then the performance of the models is evaluated using the 
following metrics accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, and 
ROC AUC. 
1. Gradient Boosting 
The confusion matrix in Fig 2 is a table that summarizes 
the classification model's accuracy by grouping examples 
into different categories. The confusion matrix has the actual 
label on one axis and the expected label of the model on the 
other, the green diagonal in the confusion matrix table above 
shows that they are essentially one and the model likewise 
predicted that outcome. The model projected it to be 
something else, but the red diagonal shows that they are 
actually one thing. 
 
Fig. 2. Confusion matrix 
2. Accuracy 
The calculation involves dividing the total number of cases 
that were successfully classified by the total number of 
examples that were classified let's consider that about a 
confusion matrix. 
 
9((:9( =
3;<3=
3;<3=<>;<>= 
(8) 
This statistic is critical when the error's predictive value for 
each class is equal. In this case, false positives need to be 
addressed more than false negatives. To determine whether an 
email is spam or not, let's examine an example. In this case, if 
an email sent by the owner didn't show that it was more 
harmful than classifying a tiny number of emails as spam, our 
method would classify it as spam. 
 
3. Precision 
It is calculated by dividing the number of correct 
predictions made by the model overall by the actual number 
of correct forecasts. To put it another way: In this case, the 
precision is 3/7 = 0.428 if our model predicts that, out of 10 
people, 7 have heart disease, but only 3 of those 7 do, in this 
case, the true positive (TP) is 3 and the false positive (FP) is 
7-3, which equals 4. 
 
?(@) =
3;
3;<>; 
(9) 
4. Recall 
In a two-class classification problem, the recall is 
calculated as the number of true positives divided by the sum 
of true positives and false negatives. Suppose there are seven 
patients with heart disease, but only five of them would 
develop the illness based on our model; in this case, recall is 
5/7=0.714 
 
(9 =
3;
3;<>= 
(10) 
5. F1 Score 
The F1 score is a weighted average of recall and precision. 
Since it is commonly recognized that FPR and false negative 
findings can occur in accuracy and recall, both are included. 
Generally speaking, the F1 score is more useful than accuracy, 
especially when there is uneven class distribution. Accuracy 
performs best when false negatives and FPR are almost equal 
in cost. If there is a considerable difference in the costs of false 
negatives and false positives, it is better to incorporate both 
precision and recall. 
 
21 @() = 2 ∗((9 ∗?(@))/((9 + ?(@)) (11) 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A.  Confusion Matrix 
 Random Forest attained the greatest accuracy among all 
algorithms, with a relatively low number of false positives 
(18) and false negatives (28), proving its efficiency in 
separating between fraudulent and real transactions and so on 
reducing false alarms. As for the Decision Tree With 130 true 
positives, also performs 
well in identifying fraud; 
nevertheless, its larger false positive rate (241) suggests a 
propensity to misclassify legitimate transactions, which can 
2025 12th International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT)
204
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Florida. Downloaded on December 29,2025 at 23:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 5 ---
result in unwarranted alarms in practical settings. AdaBoost 
was highly effective in spotting fraudulent transactions with a 
high true positive rate (144) and a very low false negative rate 
(16); yet, its much higher false positives (1,386) point to a 
trade-off between recall and precision, a typical difficulty in 
imbalanced data. With 143 true positives and 17 false 
negatives, Gradient Boosting behaved similarly to AdaBoost; 
yet, its high false positive rate (1,044) still shows a tendency 
for false alarm generation even if it is somewhat less than 
AdaBoost. Random Forest is the best balanced and 
dependable fraud detection model, hence minimizing false 
positives and false negatives, usually confusion matrix results 
are presented in separate tables for each model but for 
shortness they were combined in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
CONFUSION MATRIX RESULTS 
Algorithm 
True 
Positives 
(TP) 
True 
Negatives 
(TN) 
False 
Positives 
(FP) 
False 
Negatives 
(FN) 
Random 
Forest 
132 
85,265 
18 
28 
Decision 
Tree 
130 
85,042 
241 
30 
AdaBoost 
144 
83,897 
1,386 
16 
Gradient 
Boosting 
143 
84,239 
1,044 
17 
 
B. Perormance Metrics 
The performance metrics in Table II provide a comparison 
of the four machine learning algorithms used in this study: 
• 
Random Forest proved able to appropriately 
categorize both fraudulent and legitimate transactions 
with minimum mistakes, with the best accuracy 
(0.999415) and precision (0.857143), maintaining a 
low rate of false positives and false negatives, its 
recall (0.825000) and F1 score (0.840764) further 
support its robustness in identifying fraudulent 
activity. Random Forest appears to be the most 
reliable and balanced method available for fraud 
detection in this research. 
• 
Decision Tree with a strong recall of 0.812500 
indicates a success in identifying fraudulent 
transactions. However the low precision (0.350404) 
and F1 score (0.489642) points to a higher chance of 
misclassifying real-world events as fraudulent, which 
would cause more false alarms in practical uses. 
• 
AdaBoost and Gradient Boosting demonstrated strong 
recall 
(0.900000 
and 
0.906250, 
respectively), 
therefore demonstrating their ability to identify 
fraudulent transactions. However their poor precision 
(0.096192 and 0.117409) and F1 scores (0.173808 
and 0.207886) come with a notable trade-off: these 
models are more likely to identify real transactions as 
fraudulent, hence producing a high proportion of false 
positives. 
In 
imbalanced 
datasets—where 
the 
minority class in this case the fraudulent transactions 
are much smaller than the majority class this is a 
common difficulty. 
• 
By analyzing AUC scores, an idea of how well the 
model is performing distinguishing positive and 
negative cases and identifying positive cases. A high 
AUC score suggests that the model is better at this 
task. However, it's also important to consider other 
metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 
score to get a more complete picture of the model's 
performance. Even though Gradient Boosting and 
AdaBoost had high recall scores they were very low 
in precision, which means they are more prone to false 
positives, and that Random Forest is the best overall 
model, demonstrating a good score on all metrics of 
precision and recall, which is also reflected in its high 
F1 score. The accuracy is also the highest, indicating 
overall strong performance. 
• 
The precision-recall AUC calculates the area under 
the curve. The AUC function takes two arguments: the 
values of recall and precision at different thresholds. 
A 
higher 
AUC-PRC 
value 
indicates 
better 
performance of the model in terms of precision and 
recall. By doing such we can get an insight into the 
accurate detection of positive instances, indicating 
that the Random Forest is the best model. 
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF PERFORMANCE METRICS RESULTS 
Algorith
m 
Accura
cy 
Precisi
on 
Recall 
F1 
score 
ROC 
AUC 
Precision-
recall 
AUC 
Random 
Forest 
0.9994
15 
0.8571
43 
0.825
000 
0.8407
64 
91.24 
0.841235
28049610
34 
Decision 
Tree 
0.9968
28 
0.3504
04 
0.812
500 
0.4896
42 
90.48 
0.581627
71196781
22 
AdaBoo
st 
0.9839
78 
0.0961
92 
0.900
000 
0.1738
08 
94.21 
0.498189
82205601
24 
Gradient 
Boosting 
0.9870
67 
0.1174
09 
0.906
250 
0.2078
85 
94.67 
0.511917
23125808
56 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Conclusion 
This study focused mostly on Machine-learning algorithm 
utilization. Random Forest, Decision Trees, AdaBoost, and 
Gradient Boosting models are utilized for identifying 
fraudulent Credit Card transactions. The study dataset is 
imbalanced. One of the tactics used to balance the data and 
guarantee accurate training and testing because the dataset 
was naturally biased towards non-fraudulent transactions, was 
the SMOTE method. We then implement the proposed 
machine-learning methods. 
The proposed model with the highest accuracy, precision, 
recall, and F1 scores among the four methods was Random 
Forest. It was able to minimize false positives and false 
negatives while detecting fraudulent transactions in a 
noteworthy balance. This outcome demonstrates the Random 
Forest algorithm's resilience, especially when working with 
skewed datasets when recall and precision are crucial. 
AdaBoost and Gradient Boosting showed strong recall 
scores, but their precision was less consistent, suggesting a 
propensity for false positives. Although they were somewhat 
successful, Decision Trees did not perform as consistently 
across all measures. 
The total results highlight how crucial model selection is 
when it comes to fraud detection. The results of this study 
demonstrate how using algorithms like Random Forest, which 
2025 12th International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT)
205
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Florida. Downloaded on December 29,2025 at 23:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 6 ---
can handle imbalanced data more effectively, has a substantial 
impact on the outcomes.  
B. Future Work 
Future research can be expanded in the following 
directions by building on this study: 
• 
Feature Engineering: You can improve the forecasting 
ability of the model by investigating more feature 
engineering methods. To gain a greater understanding 
of transaction behaviors, this involves transforming 
pre-existing features into new ones. For example, 
utilizing external data sources or calculating ratios and 
patterns across time can reveal relationships that were 
previously unknown. 
• 
Real Time Detection: Low latency and high 
throughput optimization are necessary for the 
implementation of these models in real-time detection 
systems. It is possible to look at the use of online 
learning and ensemble learning algorithms to handle 
streaming data in real-time. 
• 
Pre-trained Models with Transfer Learning: Using 
transfer learning and pre-trained models together has 
the potential to greatly increase performance, 
particularly when used with big datasets. This can 
improve model generalization and cut down on the 
amount of training time needed. 
• 
Explainability and Interpretability: By making models 
easier to interpret using strategies like LIME (Local 
Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations) and 
SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations), financial 
institutions will be able to better comprehend and have 
more faith in these models. 
REFERENCES 
[1] "The 
growth 
of 
the 
credit 
card 
industry 
in 
2023," 
ClearlyPayments.com. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.clearlypayments.com/blog/growth-of-credit-card-
industry-in-2023. Accessed: Feb. 20, 2025. 
[2] R. Barker, "The use of proactive communication through knowledge 
management to create awareness and educate clients on e-banking 
fraud prevention," S. Afr. J. Bus. Manag., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 1-10, 2020. 
[3] J. L. Bele, Financial Scams, Frauds, and Threats in the Digital Age: 
Modern Approaches to Knowledge Management Development. New 
York: Springer, 2020. 
[4] J. F. Roseline et al., "Autonomous credit card fraud detection using 
machine learning approach," Comput. Electr. Eng., vol. 102, p. 
108132, 2022. 
[5] Z. Chen, "Performance comparison of machine learning algorithms for 
credit card fraud detection," Appl. Comput. Eng., vol. 6, pp. 713-721, 
2023. 
[6] K. Ayorinde, A Methodology for Detecting Credit Card Fraud. 
Mankato, MN: Minnesota State Univ., 2021. 
[7] Y. Jain et al., "A comparative analysis of various credit card fraud 
detection techniques," Int. J. Recent Technol. Eng., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 
402-407, 2019. 
[8] Z. Shi, "Cognitive machine learning," Int. J. Intell. Sci., vol. 9, no. 4, 
pp. 111-121, 2019. 
[9] Q. Bi et al., "What is machine learning? A primer for the 
epidemiologist," Amer. J. Epidemiol., vol. 188, no. 12, pp. 2222-2239, 
2019. 
[10] I. Sadgali, N. Sael, and F. Benabbou, "Fraud detection in credit card 
transaction using neural networks," in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Smart City 
Appl., 2019, pp. 1-4. 
[11] S. Akila and U. S. Reddy, "Risk based bagged ensemble (RBE) for 
credit card fraud detection," in Proc. Int. Conf. Inventive Comput. 
Informat., 2017, pp. 670-674. 
[12] F. Z. El Hlouli et al., "Credit cards fraud detection based on multilayer 
perceptron and extreme learning machine architectures," in Proc. Int. 
Conf. Intell. Syst. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 1-5. 
[13] V. Keskar, "Comparing different models for credit cards fraud 
detection," J. Crit. Rev., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 981-986, 2020. 
[14] I. H. Sarker, "Machine learning: Algorithms, real-world applications 
and research directions," SN Comput. Sci., vol. 2, no. 3, p. 160, 2021. 
[15] Y. Xie et al., "A spatial–temporal gated network for credit card fraud 
detection by learning transactional representations," IEEE Trans. 
Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 6978-6991, 2023. 
[16] J. H. Friedman, "Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting 
machine," Ann. Statist., vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 1189-1232, 2001. 
[17] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, "XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system," 
in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 
2016, pp. 785-794. 
[18] . Natekin and A. Knoll, "Gradient boosting machines, a tutorial," Front. 
Neurorobot., vol. 7, p. 21, 2013. 
2025 12th International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT)
206
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Florida. Downloaded on December 29,2025 at 23:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
