--- Page 1 ---
Production, 
Information 
Costs, 
and 
Economic 
Organization 
BY ARMEN A. ALCHIAN AND HAROLD DEMSETZ* 
The mark of a capitalistic society is that 
resources are owned and allocated by such 
nongovernmental organizations as firms, 
households, and markets. Resource owners 
increase productivity through cooperative 
specialization and this leads to the demand 
for economic organizations which facili- 
tate cooperation. When a lumber mill 
employs a cabinetmaker, cooperation be- 
tween specialists is achieved within a firm, 
and when a cabinetmaker purchases wood 
from a lumberman, the cooperation takes 
place across markets (or between firms). 
Two important problems face a theory of 
economic 
organization-to 
explain 
the 
conditions that determine whether the 
gains from specialization and cooperative 
production can better be obtained within 
an organization like the firm, or across 
markets, and to explain the structure of 
the organization. 
It is common to see the firm charac- 
terized by the power to settle issues by 
fiat, by authority, or by disciplinary action 
superior to that available in the conven- 
tional market. This is delusion. The firm 
does not own all its inputs. It has no 
power of fiat, no authority, no disciplinary 
action any different in the slightest degree 
from ordinary market contracting 
be- 
tween any two people. I can "punish" you 
only by withholding future business or by 
seeking redress in the courts for any failure 
to honor our exchange agreement. That is 
exactly all that any employer can do. He 
can fire or sue, just as I can fire my grocer 
by stopping purchases from him or sue 
him for delivering faulty products. What 
then is the content of the presumed power 
to manage and assign workers to various 
tasks? Exactly the same as one little con- 
sumer's power to manage and assign his 
grocer to various tasks. The single con- 
sumer can assign his grocer to the task of 
obtaining whatever the customer can in- 
duce the grocer to provide at a price ac- 
ceptable to both parties. That is precisely 
all that an employer can do to an em- 
ployee. To speak of managing, directing, 
or assigning workers to various tasks is a 
deceptive way of noting that the employer 
continually is involved in renegotiation of 
contracts on terms that must be acceptable 
to both parties. Telling an employee to 
type this letter rather than to file that 
document is like my telling a grocer to 
sell me this brand of tuna rather than that 
brand of bread. I have no contract to con- 
tinue to purchase from the grocer and 
neither the employer nor the employee is 
bound by any contractual obligations to 
continue 
their relationship. 
Long-term 
contracts 
between 
employer 
and em- 
ployee are not the essence of the organiza- 
tion we call a firm. My grocer can count 
on my returning day after day and pur- 
chasing his services and goods even with 
the prices not always marked on the goods 
-because 
I know what they are-and 
he 
adapts his activity 
to conform to my 
directions to him as to what I want each 
day . .. he is not my employee. 
Wherein then is the relationship be- 
tween a grocer and his employee different 
from that between a grocer and his cus- 
* Professors of economics at the University of Cali- 
fornia, Los Angeles. Acknowledgment is made for finan- 
cial aid from the E. Lilly Endowment, Inc. grant to 
UCLA for research in the behavioral effects of property 
rights. 
777 


--- Page 2 ---
778 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
tomers? It is in a team use of inputs and a 
centralized position of some party in the 
contractual arrangements of all other in- 
puts. It is the centralized contractual agent 
in a team productive process not some 
superior authoritarian directive or dis- 
ciplinary power. Exactly what is a team 
process and why does it induce the con- 
tractual form, called the firm? These prob- 
lems motivate the inquiry of this paper. 
I. The Metering Problem 
The 
economic 
organization 
through 
which input owners cooperate will make 
better use of their comparative advantages 
to the extent that it facilitates the pay- 
ment of rewards in accord with produc- 
tivity. If rewards were random, and with- 
out regard to productive effort, no in- 
centive to productive effort would be pro- 
vided by the organization; and if rewards 
were negatively correlated with produc- 
tivity the organization would be subject 
to sabotage. Two key demands are placed 
on an economic organization-metering 
input productivity and metering rewards.' 
Metering problems sometimes can be 
resolved well through the exchange of 
products across competitive markets, be- 
cause in many situations markets yield a 
high correlation between 
rewards and 
productivity. If a farmer increases his out- 
put of wheat by 10 percent at the pre- 
vailing market price, his receipts also in- 
crease by 10 percent. This method of or- 
ganizing economic activity 
meters the 
output directly, reveals the marginal prod- 
uct and apportions the rewards to re- 
source owners in accord with that direct 
measurement of their outputs. The success 
of this decentralized, market exchange in 
promoting productive 
specialization 
re- 
quires that changes in market rewards fall 
on those responsible for changes in output.2 
The classic relationship in economics 
that runs from marginal productivity to 
the distribution of income implicitly as- 
sumes the existence of an organization, be 
it the market or the firm, that allocates 
rewards to resources in accord with their 
productivity. 
The problem of economic 
organization, 
the economical means of 
metering productivity and rewards, is not 
confronted directly in the classical anal- 
ysis of production and distribution. In- 
stead, that analysis tends to assume suf- 
ficiently economic 
or zero cost 
means, 
as if productivity 
automatically 
created 
its reward. We conjecture the direction of 
causation is the reverse 
the specific sys- 
I Meter means to measure and also to apportion. One 
can meter (measure) output and one can also meter 
(control) the output. We use the word to denote both; 
the context should indicate which. 
2 A producer's wealth would be reduced by the pres- 
ent capitalized value of the future income lost by loss of 
reputation. Reputation, i.e., credibility, is an asset, 
which is another way of saying that reliable information 
about expected performance is both a costly and a 
valuable good. For acts of God that interfere with con- 
tract performance, both parties have incentives to 
reach a settlement akin to that which would have been 
reached if such events had been covered by specific con- 
tingencv clauses. The reason, again, is that a reputation 
for "honest" dealings-i.e., 
for actions similar to those 
that would probably have been reached had the con- 
tract provided this contingency-is 
wealth. 
Almost every contract is open-ended in that many 
contingencies are uncovered. For example, if a fire 
delays production of a promised product by A to B, 
and if B contends that A has not fulfilled the contract, 
how is the dispute settled and what recompense, if any, 
does A grant to B? A person uninitiated in such ques- 
tions may be surprised by the extent to which contracts 
permit either party to escape performance or to nullify 
the contract. In fact, it is hard to imagine any contract, 
which, when taken solely in terms of its stipulations, 
could not be evaded by one of the parties. Yet that is 
the ruling, viable type of contract. Why? Undoubtedly 
the best discussion that we have seen on this question is 
by Stewart Macaulay. 
There are means not only of detecting or preventing 
cheating, but also for deciding how to allocate the losses 
or gains of unpredictable events or quality of items 
exchanged. Sales contracts contain warranties, guaran- 
tees, collateral, return privileges and penalty clauses for 
specific nonperformance. These are means of assignment 
of risks of losses of cheating. A lower price without war- 
ranty-an 
"as is" purchase-places more of the risk on 
the buyer while the seller buys insurance against losses 
of his "cheating." On the other hand, a warranty or 
return privilege or service contract places more risk on 
the seller with insurance being bought by the buyer. 


--- Page 3 ---
ALCHIAN AND DEMSETZ: ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
779 
tem of rewarding which is relied upon 
stimulates a particular productivity 
re- 
sponse. 
If 
the 
economic 
organization 
meters poorly, with rewards and produc- 
tivity only loosely correlated, then pro- 
ductivity will be smaller; but if the eco- 
nomic organization meters well produc- 
tivity will be greater. What makes meter- 
ing difficult and hence induces means of 
economizing on metering costs? 
II. Team Production 
Two men jointly lift heavy cargo into 
trucks. Solely by observing 
the total 
weight loaded per day, it is impossible to 
determine each person's marginal pro- 
ductivity. 
With team production it is 
difficult, solely by observing total output, 
to either define or determine each indivi- 
dual's contribution to this output of the 
cooperating inputs. The output is yielded 
by a team, by definition, and it is not a 
sum of separable outputs of each of its 
members. Team production of Z involves 
at least two inputs, Xi and Xj, with 
a2Z1aXiaXj3X,0.3 The production 
func- 
tion is not separable into two functions 
each involving only inputs Xi or only in- 
puts Xi. Consequently there is no sum 
of Z of two separable functions to treat 
as the Z of the team production function. 
(An example of a separable case is Z= aX' 
+bXj' which is separable into Zi= aX' and 
Zj= bX%, and Z= Zi+Zj. This is not team 
production.) There exist production tech- 
niques in which the Z obtained is greater 
than if Xi and Xj had produced separable 
Z. Team production will be used if it 
yields an output enough larger than the 
sum of separable production of Z to cover 
the costs of organizing and disciplining 
team members-the 
topics of this paper.4 
Usual explanations of the gains from 
cooperative 
behavior rely on exchange 
and production in accord with the com- 
parative 
advantage 
specialization 
prin- 
ciple with separable additive production. 
However, as suggested above there is a 
source of gain from cooperative activity 
involving working as a team, wherein in- 
dividual cooperating inputs do not yield 
identifiable, separate products which can 
be summed to measure the total output. 
For this cooperative productive activity, 
here called "team" production, measuring 
marginal productivity 
and making pay- 
ments in accord therewith is more expen- 
sive by an order of magnitude than for 
separable production functions. 
Team production, to repeat, is produc- 
tion in which 1) several types of resources 
are used and 2) the product is not a sum 
of separable outputs of each cooperating 
resource. An additional factor creates a 
team organization problem-3) 
not all re- 
sources used in team production belong to 
one person. 
We do not inquire into why all the 
jointly used resources are not owned by 
one person, but instead into the types of 
organization, contracts, and informational 
and payment 
procedures 
used among 
owners of teamed inputs. With respect to 
the one-owner case, perhaps it is sufficient 
merely to note that (a) slavery is pro- 
hibited, (b) one might assume risk aver- 
sion as a reason for one person's not bor- 
rowing enough to purchase all the assets 
or sources of services rather than renting 
them, and (c) the purchase-resale spread 
may be so large that costs of short-term 
ownership exceed rental costs. Our prob- 
lem is viewed basically as one of organiza- 
tion among different people, not of the 
physical goods or services, however much 
there must be selection and choice of com- 
bination of the latter. 
How can the members of a team be re- 
warded and induced to work efficiently? 
I The function is separable into additive functions if 
the cross partial derivative is zero, i.e., if a2Z/1XjaX;= O. 
4 With sufficient generality of notation and concep- 
tion this team production function could be formulated 
as a case of the generalized production function inter- 
pretation given by our colleague, E. A. Thompson. 


--- Page 4 ---
780 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
In team production, marginal products of 
cooperative 
team members are not so 
directly and separably (i.e., cheaply) ob- 
servable. What a team offers to the 
market can be taken as the marginal 
product of the team but not of the team 
members. The costs of metering or ascer- 
taining the marginal products of the team's 
members is what calls forth new organiza- 
tions and procedures. Clues to each input's 
productivity can be secured by observing 
behavior of individual inputs. When lifting 
cargo into the truck, how rapidly does a 
man move to the next piece to be loaded, 
how 
many 
cigarette 
breaks 
does 
he 
take, does the item being lifted tilt down- 
ward toward his side? 
If detecting such behavior were cost- 
less, neither party would have an incen- 
tive to shirk, because neither could impose 
the cost of his shirking on the other (if 
their cooperation was agreed to volun- 
tarily). But since costs must be incurred 
to monitor each other, each input owner 
will have more incentive to shirk when he 
works as part of a team, than if his per- 
formance could be monitored easily or if 
he did not work as a team. If there is a 
net increase in productivity available by 
team production, net of the metering cost 
associated with disciplining the team, then 
team production will be relied upon rather 
than a multitude of bilateral exchange of 
separable individual outputs. 
Both leisure and higher income enter a 
person's utility 
function.5 Hence, each 
person should adjust his work and realized 
reward so as to equate the marginal rate of 
substitution between leisure and produc- 
tion of real output to his marginal rate of 
substitution in consumption. That is, he 
would adjust his rate of work to bring his 
demand prices of leisure and output to 
equality with their true costs. However, 
with detection, policing, monitoring, mea- 
suring or metering costs, each person will 
be induced to take more leisure, because 
the effect of relaxing on his realized (re- 
ward) rate of substitution between output 
and leisure will be less than the effect on 
the true rate of substitution. His realized 
cost of leisure will fall more than the true 
cost of leisure, so he "buys" more leisure 
(i.e., more nonpecuniary reward). 
If his relaxation cannot be detected per- 
fectly at zero cost, part of its effects will 
be borne by others in the team, thus mak- 
ing his realized cost of relaxation less than 
the true total cost to the team. The dif- 
ficulty of detecting such actions permits 
the private costs of his actions to be less 
than their full costs. Since each person 
responds to his private realizable rate of 
substitution (in production) rather than 
the true total (i.e., social) rate, and so 
long as there are costs for other people to 
detect his shift toward relaxation, it will 
not pay (them) to force him to readjust 
completely 
by making him realize the 
true cost. Only enough efforts will be 
made to equate the marginal gains of de- 
tection activity with the marginal costs of 
detection; and that implies a lower rate of 
productive effort and more shirking than 
in a costless monitoring, or measuring, 
world. 
In a university, the faculty use office 
telephones, paper, and mail for personal 
uses beyond strict university productivity. 
The university administrators could stop 
such practices by identifying the respon- 
sible person in each case, but they can do so 
only at higher costs than administrators 
are willing to incur. The extra costs of 
identifying each party (rather than merely 
identifying the presence of such activity) 
would exceed the savings from diminished 
faculty 
"turpitudinal 
peccadilloes." 
So 
the faculty is allowed some degree of 
"privileges, perquisites, or fringe benefits." 
And the total of the pecuniary wages paid 
5 More precisely: "if anything other than pecuniary 
income enters his ultility function." Leisure stands for all 
nonpecuniary income for simplicity of exposition. 


--- Page 5 ---
ALCHIAN AND DEMSETZ: ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
781 
is lower because of this irreducible (at 
acceptable costs) degree of amenity-seiz- 
ing activity. Pay is lower in pecuniary 
terms and higher in leisure, conveniences, 
and ease of work. But still every person 
would prefer to see detection made more 
effective (if it were somehow possible to 
monitor costlessly) so that he, as part of 
the now more effectively producing team, 
could thereby realize a higher pecuniary 
pay and less leisure. If everyone could, at 
zero cost, have his reward-realized rate 
brought to the true production possibility 
real rate, all could achieve a more pre- 
ferred position. But detection of the re- 
sponsible parties is costly; that cost acts 
like a tax on work rewards.6 Viable shirk- 
ing is the result. 
What forms of organizing team produc- 
tion will lower the cost of detecting "per- 
formance" (i.e., marginal productivity) 
and bring personally realized rates of 
substitution closer to true rates of sub- 
stitution? Market competition, 
in prin- 
ciple, could monitor some team produc- 
tion. (It already organizes teams.) Input 
owners who are not team members can 
offer, in return for a smaller share of the 
team's rewards, to replace excessively (i.e., 
overpaid) shirking members. Market com- 
petition among potential team members 
would determine team membership and 
individual rewards. There would be no 
team leader, manager, organizer, owner, 
or employer. For such decentralized or- 
ganizational control to work, outsiders, 
possibly after observing each team's total 
output, can speculate about their capabili- 
ties as team members and, by a market 
competitive process, revised teams with 
greater productive ability will be formed 
and sustained. Incumbent members will be 
constrained by threats of replacement by 
outsiders offering services for lower reward 
shares or offering greater rewards to the 
other members of the team. Any team 
member who shirked in the expectation 
that the reduced output effect would not 
be attributed to him will be displaced if 
his activity is detected. Teams of produc- 
tive inputs, like business units, would 
evolve in apparent spontaneity 
in the 
market-without 
any central organizing 
agent, team manager, or boss. 
But completely effective control cannot 
be expected from individualized market 
competition for two reasons. First, for 
this competition to be completely effec- 
tive, new challengers for team membership 
must know where, and to what extent, 
shirking is a serious problem, i.e., know 
they can increase net output as compared 
with the inputs they replace. To the extent 
that this is true it is probably possible for 
existing fellow team members to recognize 
the shirking. But, by definition, the detec- 
tion of shirking by observing team output 
is costly for team production. Secondly, as- 
sume the presence of detection costs, and 
assume that in order to secure a place on 
the team a new input owner must accept 
a smaller share of rewards (or a promise to 
produce more). Then his incentive to shirk 
would still be at least as great as the in- 
centives of the inputs replaced, because he 
still bears less than the entire reduction in 
team output for which he is responsible. 
III. The Classical Firm 
One method of reducing shirking is for 
someone to specialize as a monitor to check 
the input performance of team members.7 
6 Do not assume that the sole result of the cost of 
detecting shirking is one form of payment (more leisure 
and less take home money). With several members of 
the team, each has an incentive to cheat against each 
other by engaging in more than the average amount of 
such leisure if the employer can not tell at zero cost 
which employee is taking more than average. As a 
result the total productivity of the team is lowered. 
Shirking detection costs thus change the form of pay- 
ment and also result in lower total rewards. Because the 
cross partial derivatives are positive, shirking reduces 
other people's marginal products. 
I What is meant by performance? Input energy, ini- 
tiative, work attitude, perspiration, rate of exhaustion? 
(Continuedl) 


--- Page 6 ---
782 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
But who will monitor the monitor? One 
constraint on the monitor is the aforesaid 
market 
competition 
offered by 
other 
monitors, but for reasons already given, 
that is not perfectly effective. Another 
constraint can be imposed on the monitor: 
give him title to the net earnings of the 
team, net of payments to other inputs. 
If owners of cooperating inputs agree with 
the monitor that he is to receive any 
residual product above prescribed amounts 
(hopefully, the marginal value products of 
the other inputs), the monitor will have 
an added incentive not to shirk as a 
monitor. Specialization in monitoring plus 
reliance on a residual claimant status will 
reduce shirking; but additional links are 
needed to forge the firm of classical eco- 
nomic theory. 
How will the residual 
claimant monitor the other inputs? 
We use the term monitor to connote 
several activities in addition to its dis- 
ciplinary connotation. It connotes mea- 
suring output performance, apportioning 
rewards, observing the input behavior of 
inputs as means of detecting or estimating 
their marginal productivity and giving as- 
signments or instructions in what to do 
and how to do it. (It also includes, as we 
shall show later, authority to terminate 
or revise contracts.) Perhaps the contrast 
between a football coach and team cap- 
tain is helpful. The coach selects strategies 
and tactics 
and sends in instructions 
about what plays to utilize. The captain 
is essentially an observer and reporter of 
the performance at close hand of the mem- 
bers. The latter is an inspector-steward 
and the former a supervisor manager. 
For the present all these activities are in- 
cluded in the rubric "monitoring." All 
these tasks are, in principle, negotiable 
across markets, but we are presuming that 
such market measurement of marginal 
productivities and job reassignments are 
not so cheaply performed for team pro- 
duction. And in particular our analysis 
suggests that it is not so much the costs 
of spontaneously negotiating contracts in 
the markets among groups for team pro- 
duction as it is the detection of the per- 
formance of individual members of the 
team that calls for the organization noted 
here. 
The specialist who receives the residual 
rewards will be the monitor of the mem- 
bers of the team (i.e., will manage the use 
of cooperative inputs). The monitor earns 
his residual through the reduction in 
shirking that he brings about, not only by 
the prices that he agrees to pay the owners 
of the inputs, but also by observing and 
directing the actions or uses of these in- 
puts. Managing or examining the ways to 
which inputs are used in team production 
is a method of metering the marginal pro- 
ductivity of individual inputs to the team's 
output. 
To discipline team members and reduce 
shirking, the residual claimant must have 
power to revise the contract terms and in- 
centives of individual members without 
having to terminate or alter every other 
input's contract. Hence, team members 
who seek to increase their productivity 
will assign to the monitor not only the 
residual claimant right but also the right 
to alter individual membership and per- 
formance on the team. Each team mem- 
ber, of course, can terminate his own 
membership 
(i.e., quit the team), but 
only the monitor may unilaterally ter- 
minate the membership of any of the 
Or output? It is the latter that is sought-the 
effect or 
output. But performance is nicely ambiguous because it 
suggests both input and output. It is nicely ambiguous 
because as we shall see, sometimes by inspecting a team 
member's input activitv we can better judge his output 
effect, perhaps not with complete accuracy but better 
than by watching the output of the team. It is not always 
the case that watching input activity is the only or best 
means of detecting, measuring or monitoring output 
effects of each team member, but in some cases it is a 
useful way. For the moment the word performance 
glosses over these aspects and facilitates concentration 
on other issues. 


--- Page 7 ---
ALCHIAN AND DEMSETZ: ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
783 
other members without necessarily ter- 
minating the team itself or his association 
with the team; and he alone can expand or 
reduce membership, 
alter the mix of 
membership, or sell the right to be the 
residual claimant-monitor of the team. It 
is this entire bundle of rights: 1) to be a 
residual claimant; 2) to observe input 
behavior; 3) to be the central party com- 
mon to all contracts with inputs; 4) to 
alter the membership of the team; and 
5) to sell these rights, that defines the 
ownership (or the employer) of the classical 
(capitalist, 
free-enterprise) 
firm. 
The 
coalescing of these rights has arisen, our 
analysis asserts, because it resolves the 
shirking-information 
problem 
of 
team 
production better than does the noncen- 
tralized contractual arrangement. 
The relationship of each team member 
to the owner of the firm (i.e., the party 
common to all input contracts and the 
residual claimant) is simply a "quid pro 
quo" contract. Each makes a purchase 
and sale. The employee "orders" the owner 
of the team to pay him money in the same 
sense that the employer directs the team 
member to perform certain acts. The 
employee can terminate the contract as 
readily as can the employer, and long- 
term contracts, therefore, are not an es- 
sential attribute 
of the firm. Nor are 
"authoritarian," "dictational," or "fiat" 
attributes relevant to the conception of the 
firm or its efficiency. 
In summary, two necessary conditions 
exist for the emergence of the firm on the 
prior assumption that more than pecuniary 
wealth enter utility functions: 1) It is 
possible to increase productivity through 
team-oriented production, a production 
technique for which it is costly to directly 
measure the marginal outputs of the co- 
operating inputs. This makes it more 
difficult to restrict shirking through simple 
market exchange between cooperating in- 
puts. 2) It is economical to estimate mar- 
ginal productivity by observing or specify- 
ing input behavior. The simultaneous oc- 
currence of both these preconditions leads 
to the contractual organization of inputs, 
known as the classical capitalist firms with 
(a) joint input production, (b) several in- 
put owners, (c) one party who is common 
to all the contracts of the joint inputs, (d) 
who has rights to renegotiate any input's 
contract independently of contracts with 
other input owners, (e) who holds the 
residual claim, and (f) who has the right 
to sell his central contractual 
residual 
status.8 
Other Theories of the Firm 
At this juncture, as an aside, we briefly 
place this theory of the firm in the contexts 
of those offered by Ronald Coase and 
Frank Knight.9 Our view of the firm is not 
necessarily inconsistent with Coase's; we 
attempt to go further and identify refut- 
able implications. Coase's penetrating in- 
sight is to make more of the fact that 
markets do not operate costlessly, and he 
relies on the cost of using markets to form 
contracts as his basic explanation for the 
existence of firms. We do not disagree with 
the proposition that, ceteris paribus, the 
higher is the cost of transacting across 
markets the greater will be the compara- 
tive advantage 
of organizing resources 
within the firm; it is a difficult proposition 
to disagree with or to refute. We could 
with equal ease subscribe to a theory of 
the firm based on the cost of managing, 
for surely it is true that, ceteris paribus, 
the lower is the cost of managing the 
greater will be the comparative advantage 
of organizing resources within the firm. To 
move the theory forward, it is necessary 
to know what is meant by a firm and to 
8 Removal of (b) converts a capitalist proprietary firm 
to a socialist firm. 
9 Recognition must also be made to the seminal in- 
quiries by Morris Silver anid Richard Auster, and by 
H. B. Malmgren. 


--- Page 8 ---
784 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
explain the circumstances under which 
the cost of "managing" resources is low 
relative to the cost of allocating resources 
through market transaction. The concep- 
tion of and rationale for the classical firm 
that we propose takes a step down the 
path pointed out by Coase toward that 
goal. Consideration of team production, 
team organization, difficulty in metering 
outputs, and the problem of shirking are 
important to our explanation but, so far 
as we can ascertain, not in Coase's. Coase's 
analysis insofar as it had heretofore been 
developed would suggest open-ended con- 
tracts but does not appear to imply any- 
thing more-neither 
the residual claimant 
status nor the distinction between em- 
ployee and subcontractor status (nor any 
of the implications indicated below). And 
it is not true that employees are generally 
employed on the basis of long-term con- 
tractual arrangements any more than on a 
series of short-term or indefinite length 
contracts. 
The importance of our proposed addi- 
tional elements is revealed, for example, 
by the explanation of why the person to 
whom the control monitor is responsible 
receives the residual, and also by our 
later discussion of the implications about 
the corporation, partnerships, and profit 
sharing. These alternative forms for or- 
ganization of the firm are difficult to re- 
solve on the basis of market transaction 
costs only. Our exposition also suggests a 
definition of the classical firm-something 
crucial that was heretofore absent. 
In addition, sometimes a technological 
development will lower the cost of market 
transactions while, at the same time, it 
expands the role of the firm. When the 
"putting out" system was used for weav- 
ing, inputs were organized largely through 
market negotiations. With the develop- 
ment of efficient central sources of power, 
it became economical to perform weaving 
in proximity to the power source and to 
engage in team production. The bringing 
in of weavers surely must have resulted in 
a reduction in the cost of negotiating 
(forming) contracts. Yet, what we ob- 
serve is the beginning of the factory sys- 
tem in which inputs are organized within 
a firm. Why? The weavers did not simply 
move to a common source of power that 
they could tap like an electric line, pur- 
chasing power while they used their own 
equipment. Now team production in the 
joint use of equipment became more im- 
portant. The measurement of marginal 
productivity, which now involved interac- 
tions between workers, especially through 
their joint use of machines, became more 
difficult though contract negotiating cost 
was reduced, while managing the behavior 
of inputs became easier because of the in- 
creased centralization 
of activity. 
The 
firm as an organization expanded even 
though the cost of transactions was re- 
duced by the advent of centralized power. 
The same could be said for modern as- 
sembly lines. Hence the emergence of 
central power sources expanded the scope 
of productive activity in which the firm 
enjoyed a comparative advantage as an 
organizational form. 
Some 
economists, 
following 
Knight, 
have identified the bearing of risks of 
wealth changes with the director or central 
employer without explaining why that is 
a viable arrangement. Presumably, the 
more risk-averse inputs become employees 
rather than owners of the classical firm. 
Risk averseness and uncertainty with re- 
gard to the firm's fortunes have little, if 
anything, to do with our explanation al- 
though it helps to explain why all re- 
sources in a team are not owned by one 
person. That is, the role of risk taken in 
the sense of absorbing the windfalls that 
buffet the firm because of unforeseen com- 
petition, 
technological 
change, or fluc- 
tuations in demand are not central to our 
theory, although it is true that imperfect 
knowledge and, therefore, risk, in this 
sense of risk, underlie the problem of 


--- Page 9 ---
ALCHIAN AND DEMSETZ: ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
785 
monitoring team behavior. We deduce the 
system of paying the manager with a 
residual claim (the equity) from the desire 
to have efficient means to reduce shirking 
so as to make team production economical 
and not from the smaller aversion to the 
risks of enterprise in a dynamic economy. 
We conjecture that "distribution-of-risk" 
is not a valid rationale for the existence 
and organization of the classical firm. 
Although we have emphasized team 
production as creating a costly metering 
task and have treated team production as 
an essential (necessary?) condition for the 
firm, would not other obstacles to cheap 
metering also call forth the same kind of 
contractual arrangement here denoted as 
a firm? For example, suppose a farmer 
produces wheat in an easily ascertained 
quantity but with subtle and difficult to 
detect quality variations determined by 
how the farmer grew the wheat. A vertical 
integration could allow a purchaser to 
control the farmer's behavior in order to 
more economically estimate productivity. 
But this is not a case of joint or team 
production, unless "information" can be 
considered part of the product. (While a 
good case could be made for that broader 
conception of production, we shall ignore 
it here.) Instead of forming a firm, a buyer 
can contract to have his inspector on the 
site of production, just as home builders 
contract with architects to supervise build- 
ing contracts; that arrangement is not a 
firm. Still, a firm might be organized in 
the production of many products wherein 
no team production or jointness of use of 
separately owned resources is involved. 
This possibility rather clearly indicates 
a broader, or complementary, 
approach 
to that which we have chosen. 1) As we do 
in this paper, it can be argued that the 
firm is the particular policing 
device 
utilized when joint team production is 
present. If other sources of high policing 
costs arise, as in the wheat case just in- 
dicated, some other form of contractual ar- 
rangement will be used. Thus to each 
source of informational cost there may be 
a different type of policing and contractual 
arrangement. 2) On the other hand, one 
can say that where policing is difficult 
across markets, various forms of contrac- 
tual arrangements are devised, but there is 
no reason for that known as the firm to be 
uniquely related or even highly correlated 
with team production, as defined here. It 
might be used equally probably and viably 
for other sources of high policing cost. We 
have 
not 
intensively 
analyzed 
other 
sources, and we can only note that our 
current and readily revisable conjecture 
is that 1) is valid, and has motivated us in 
our current endeavor. In any event, the 
test of the theory advanced here is to see 
whether the conditions we have identified 
are necessary for firms to have long-run 
viability rather than merely births with 
high infant mortality. Conglomerate firms 
or collections of separate production agen- 
cies into one owning organization can be in- 
terpreted as an investment trust or in- 
vestment 
diversification 
device-prob- 
ably 
along 
the 
lines 
that 
motivated 
Knight's interpretation. A holding com- 
pany can be called a firm, because of the 
common association of the word firm with 
any ownership unit that owns income 
sources. The term firm as commonly used 
is so turgid of meaning that we can not 
hope to explain every entity to which the 
name is attached in common or even tech- 
nical literature. Instead, we seek to iden- 
tify and explain a particular contractual 
arrangement induced by the cost of in- 
formation factors analyzed in this paper. 
IV. Types of Firms 
A. Profit-Sharing Firms 
Explicit 
in our explanation 
of the 
capitalist firm is the assumption that the 
cost of managing the team's inputs by a 
central monitor, who disciplines himself 
because he is a residual claimant, is low 


--- Page 10 ---
786 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
relative to the cost of metering the mar- 
ginal outputs of team members. 
If we look within a firm to see who 
monitors-hires, 
fires, changes, promotes, 
and renegotiates-we 
should find him be- 
ing a residual claimant or, at least, one 
whose pay or reward is more than any 
others correlated with fluctuations in the 
residual value of the firm. They more 
likely will have options or rights or bonuses 
than will inputs with other tasks. 
An implicit "auxiliary" assumption of 
our explanation of the firm is that the 
cost of team production is increased if the 
residual claim is not held entirely by the 
central monitor. That is, we assume that 
if profit sharing had to be relied upon for 
all team members, losses from the result- 
ing increase in central monitor shirking 
would exceed the output gains from the 
increased incentives of other team mem- 
bers not to shirk. If the optimal team size 
is only two owners of inputs, then an 
equal division of profits and losses be- 
tween them will leave each with stronger 
incentives to reduce shirking than if the 
optimal team size is large, for in the latter 
case only a smaller percentage of the losses 
occasioned by the shirker will be borne by 
him. Incentives to shirk are positively re- 
lated to the optimal size of the team under 
an equal profit-sharing scheme.10 
The preceding does not imply that profit 
sharing is never viable. Profit sharing to 
encourage self-policing is more appropriate 
for small teams. And, indeed, where input 
owners are free to make whatever con- 
tractual arrangements suit them, as gen- 
erally is true in capitalist economies, profit 
sharing seems largely limited to partner- 
ships with a relatively small number of 
active"1 partners. Another advantage of 
such arrangements for smaller teams is 
that it permits more effective reciprocal 
monitoring 
among 
inputs. 
Monitoring 
need not be entirely specialized. 
Profit sharing is more viable if small 
team size is associated with situations 
where the cost of specialized management 
of inputs is large relative to the increased 
productivity potential in team effort. We 
conjecture that the cost of managing team 
inputs increases if the productivity of a 
team member is difficult to correlate with 
his behavior. In "artistic" or "profes- 
sional" work, watching a man's activities 
is not a good clue to what he is actually 
thinking or doing with his mind. While it 
is relatively easy to manage or direct the 
loading of trucks by a team of dock 
workers where input activity is so highly 
related in an obvious way to output, it is 
more difficult to manage and direct a 
lawyer in the preparation and presenta- 
tion of a case. Dock workers can be di- 
rected in detail without the monitor him- 
self loading the truck, and assembly line 
workers can be monitored by varying the 
speed of the assembly line, but detailed 
direction in the preparation of a law case 
would require in much greater degree that 
the monitor prepare the case himself. As 
a result, artistic or professional inputs, 
such as lawyers, advertising specialists, 
and doctors, will be given relatively freer 
reign with regard to individual behavior. 
If the management of inputs is relatively 
costly, or ineffective, as it would seem to 
be in these cases, but, nonetheless if team 
effort is more productive than separable 
production with exchange across markets, 
then there will develop a tendency to use 
profit-sharing schemes to provide incen- 
tives to avoid shirking. 12 
10 While the degree to which residual claims are cen- 
tralized will affect the size of the team, this will be only 
one of manv factors that determine team size, so as an 
approximation, we can treat team size as exogenously 
determined. Under certain assumptions about the 
shape of the "typical" utility function, the incentive to 
avoid shirking with unequal profit-sharing can be mea- 
sured by the Herfindahl index. 
11 The use of the word active will be clarified in our 
discussion of the corporation, which follows below. 
12 Some sharing contracts, like crop sharing, or rental 


--- Page 11 ---
ALCHIAN AND DEMSETZ: 
ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
787 
B. Socialist Firms 
We have analyzed the classical propri- 
etorship and the profit-sharing firms in the 
context of free association and choice of 
economic organization. Such organizations 
need not be the most viable when political 
constraints limit the forms of organization 
that can be chosen. It is one thing to have 
profit sharing when professional or artistic 
talents are used by small teams. But if 
political or tax or subsidy considerations 
induce 
profit-sharing 
techniques 
when 
these 
are not 
otherwise 
economically 
justified, 
then 
additional 
management 
techniques will be developed to help re- 
duce the degree of shirking. 
For example, most, if not all, firms in 
Jugoslavia are owned by the employees in 
the restricted sense that all share in the 
residual. This is true for large firms and 
for firms which employ nonartistic, 
or 
nonprofessional, workers as well. With a 
decay of political constraints, 
most of 
these firms could be expected to rely on 
paid wages rather than shares in the resid- 
ual. This rests on our auxiliary assump- 
tion that general sharing in the residual 
results in losses from enhanced shirking 
by the monitor that exceed the gains from 
reduced shirking by residual-sharing em- 
ployees. If this were not so, profit sharing 
with employees should have occurred more 
frequently in Western societies where such 
organizations 
are neither 
banned 
nor 
preferred politically. Where residual shar- 
ing by employees is politically imposed, 
as in Jugoslavia, we are led to expect that 
some management technique will arise to 
reduce the shirking by the central monitor, 
a technique that will not be found fre- 
quently in Western societies since the 
monitor retains all (or much) of the re- 
sidual in the West and profit sharing is 
largely confined to small, professional- 
artistic team production situations. We do 
find in the larger scale residual-sharing 
firms in Jugoslavia that there are em- 
ployee committees that can recommend 
(to the state) the termination of a man- 
ager's contract 
(veto his continuance) 
with the enterprise. We conjecture that 
the workers' committee is given the right 
to recommend the termination 
of the 
manager's contract precisely because the 
general sharing of the residual increases 
''excessively" the manager's incentive to 
shirk. 13 
C. The Corporation 
All firms must initially acquire com- 
mand over some resources. The corpora- 
tion does so primarily by selling promises 
of future returns to those who (as creditors 
or owners) provide financial capital. In 
some situations resources can be acquired 
in advance from consumers by promises 
of future delivery (for example, advance 
sale of a proposed book). Or where the 
firm is a few artistic or professional per- 
sons, each can "chip in" with time and 
talent until the sale of services brings in 
revenues. For the most part, capital can 
be acquired more cheaply if many (risk- 
averse) investors contribute small por- 
tions to a large investment. The economies 
of raising large sums of equity capital in 
this way suggest that modifications in the 
relationship among corporate inputs are 
required to cope with the shirking problem 
payments based on gross sales in retail stores, come 
close to profit sharing. However, it is gross output shar- 
ing rather than profit sharing. We are unable to specify 
the implications of the difference. We refer the reader to 
S. N. Cheung. 
13 Incidentally, investment activity will be changed. 
The inability to capitalize the investment value as 
"take-home" proviate property wealth of the members of 
the firm means that the benefits of the investment must 
be taken as annual income by those who are employed 
at the time of the income. Investment will be confined 
more to those with shorter life and with higher rates or 
pay-offs if the alternative of investing is paying out the 
firm's income to its employees to take home and use as 
private property. For a development of this proposi- 
tion, see the papeis by Eirik Furobotn and Svetozar 
Pejovich, and by Pejovich. 


--- Page 12 ---
788 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
that arises with profit sharing among large 
numbers of corporate stockholders. One 
modification is limited liability, especially 
for firms that are large relative to a stock- 
holder's wealth. It serves to protect stock- 
holders from large losses no matter how 
they are caused. 
If every stock owner participated in 
each decision in a corporation, not only 
would large bureaucratic 
costs be in- 
curred, but many would shirk the task of 
becoming well informed on the issue to be 
decided, since the losses associated with 
unexpectedly bad decisions will be borne 
in large part by the many other corporate 
shareholders. More effective control of 
corporate activity is achieved for most 
purposes by transferring decision author- 
ity to a smaller group, whose main function 
is to negotiate with and manage (renegotiate 
with) the other inputs of the team. The 
corporate stockholders retain the authority 
to revise the membership of the manage- 
ment group and over major decisions that 
affect the structure of the corporation or 
its dissolution. 
As a result a new modification of part- 
nerships is induced-the 
right to sale of 
corporate shares without approval of any 
other stockholders. Any shareholder can 
remove his wealth from control by those 
with whom he has differences of opinion. 
Rather than try to control the decisions 
of the management, which is harder to do 
with many stockholders than with only a 
few, unrestricted 
salability 
provides 
a 
more acceptable escape to each stock- 
holder from continued policies with which 
he disagrees. 
Indeed, 
the 
policing 
of managerial 
shirking relies on across-market competi- 
tion from new groups of would-be man- 
agers as well as competition from members 
within the firm who seek to displace exist- 
ing management. In addition to competi- 
tion from outside and inside managers, 
control is facilitated 
by the temporary 
congealing of share votes into voting blocs 
owned by one or a few contenders. Proxy 
battles or stock-purchases concentrate the 
votes required to displace the existing 
management or modify managerial policies. 
But it is more than a change in policy that 
is sought by the newly formed financial 
interests, whether of new stockholders or 
not. It is the capitalization of expected 
future benefits into stock prices that con- 
centrates on the innovators the wealth 
gains of their actions if they own large 
numbers of shares. Without capitalization 
of future benefits, there would be less in- 
centive to incur the costs required to exert 
informed decisive influence on the corpo- 
ration's policies and managing personnel. 
Temporarily, the structure of ownership is 
reformed, moving 
away from diffused 
ownership into decisive power blocs, and 
this is a transient resurgence of the clas- 
sical firm with power again concentrated 
in those who have title to the residual. 
In assessing the significance of stock- 
holders' power it is not the usual diffusion 
of voting power that is significant but in- 
stead the frequency with which voting 
congeals into decisive changes. Even a 
one-man owned company may have a 
long term with just one manager-con- 
tinuously being approved by the owner. 
Similarly a dispersed voting power corpo- 
ration may be also characterized by a 
long-lived management. The question is 
the probability 
of replacement 
of the 
management if it behaves in ways not ac- 
ceptable to a majority of the stockholders. 
The unrestricted salability of stock and 
the transfer of proxies enhances the prob- 
ability of decisive action in the event cur- 
rent stockholders or any outsider believes 
that management is not doing a good job 
with the corporation. We are not compar- 
ing the corporate responsiveness to that 
of a single proprietorship; instead, we are 
indicating features of the corporate struc- 
ture that are induced by the problem of 


--- Page 13 ---
ALCHIAN AND DEMSETZ: ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
789 
delegated 
authority 
to 
manager-moni- 
tors. 14 
D. Mutual and Nonprofit Firms 
The benefits obtained by the new man- 
agement are greater if the stock can be 
purchased and sold, because this enables 
capitalization of anticipated 
future im- 
provements into present wealth of new 
managers who bought stock and created 
a larger capital by their management 
changes. But in nonprofit corporations, 
colleges, churches, country clubs, mutual 
savings banks, mutual insurance com- 
panies, and "coops," the future conse- 
quences of improved management are not 
14 Instead of thinking of shareholders as joint owners, 
we can think of them as investors, like bondholders, 
except that the stockholders are more optimistic than 
bondholders about the enterprise prospects. Instead of 
buying bonds in the corporation, thus enjoying smaller 
risks, shareholders prefer to invest funds with a greater 
realizable return if the firm prospers as expected, but 
with smaller (possibly negative) returns if the firm per- 
forms in a manner closer to that expected by the more 
pessimistic investors. The pessimistic investors, in 
turn, regard only the bonds as likely to pay off. 
If the entrepreneur-organizer is to raise capital on the 
best terms to him, it is to his advantage, as well as that 
of prospective investors, to recognize these differences in 
expectations. The residual claim on earnings enjoyed by 
shareholders does not serve the function of enhancing 
their efficiency as monitors in the general situation. The 
stockholders are "merely" the less risk-averse or the 
more optimistic member of the group that finances the 
firm. Being more optimistic than the average and seeing 
a higher mean value future return, they are willing to 
pay more for a certificate that allows them to realize 
gain on their expectations. One method of doing so is to 
buy claims to the distribution of returns that "they see" 
while bondholders, who are more pessimistic, purchase a 
claim to the distribution that they see as more likely to 
emerge. Stockholders are then comparable to warrant 
holders. They care not about the voting rights (usually 
not attached to warrants); they are in the same position 
in so far as voting rights are concerned as are bond- 
holders. The only difference is in the probability distri- 
bujtion of rewards and the terms on which they can 
place their bets. 
If we treat bondholders, preferred and convertible 
preferred stockholders, and common stockholders and 
warrant holders as simply different classes of investors- 
differing not only in their risk averseness but in their 
beliefs about the probability distribution of the firm's 
future earnings, why should stockholders be regarded as 
"owners" in any sense distinct from the other financial 
investors? The entrepreneur-organizer, who let us 
assume is the chief operating officer and sole repository 
of control of the corporation, does not find his authority 
residing in common stockholders (except in the case of a 
take over). Does this type of control make any differ- 
ence in the way the firm is conducted? Would it make 
any difference in the kinds of behavior that would be 
tolerated by competing managers and investors (and we 
here deliberately refrain from thinking of them as 
owner-stockholders in the traditional sense)? 
Investment old timers recall a significant incidence of 
nonvoting common stock, now prohibited in corpora- 
tions whose stock is traded on listed exchanges. (Why 
prohibited?) The entrepreneur in those days could hold 
voting shares while investors held nonvoting shares, 
which in every other respect were identical. Nonvoting 
share holders were simply investors devoid of ownership 
connotations. The control and behavior of inside owners 
in such corporations has never, so far as we have ascer- 
tained, been carefully studied. For example, at the 
simplest level of interest, does the evidence indicate that 
nonvoting shareholders fared any worse because of not 
having voting rights? Did owners permit the nonvoting 
holders the normal return available to voting share- 
holders? Though evidence is prohibitively expensive to 
obtain, it is remarkable that voting and nonvoting 
shares sold for essentially identical prices, even during 
some proxy battles. However, our casual evidence de- 
serves no more than interest-initiating weight. 
One more point. The facade is deceptive. Instead of 
nonvoting shares, today we have warrants, convertible 
preferred stocks all of which are solely or partly "equity" 
claims without voting rights, though they could be con- 
verted into voting shares. 
In sum, is it the case that the stockholder-investor 
relationship is one emanating from the division of 
ownershlip among several people, or is it that the collec- 
tion of investment funds from people of varying antici- 
pations is the underlying factor? If the latter, why 
should any of them be thought of as the owners in 
whom voting rights, whatever they may signify or how- 
ever exercisable, should reside in order to enhance effi- 
ciency? Why voting rights in any of the outside, par- 
ticipating investors? 
Our initial perception of this possibly significant dif- 
ference in interpretation was precipitated by Henry 
Manne. A reading of his paper makes it clear that it is 
hard to understand why an investor who wishes to back 
and "share" in the consequences of some new business 
should necessarily have to acquire voting power (i.e., 
power to change the manager-operator) in order to 
invest in the venture. In fact, we invest in some ven- 
tures in the hope that no other stockholders will be so 
"foolish" as to trv to toss out the incumbent manage- 
ment. We want him to have the power to stay in office, 
and for the prospect of sharing in his fortunes we buy 
nonvoting common stock. Our willingness to invest is 
enhanced by the knowledge that we can act legally via 
fraud, embezzlement and other laws to help assure that 
we outside investors will not be "milked" beyond our 
initial discounted anticipations. 


--- Page 14 ---
790 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
capitalized into present wealth of stock- 
holders. (As if to make more difficult that 
competition by new would-be monitors, 
mutiple shares of ownership in those en- 
terprises cannot be bought by one person.) 
One should, therefore, find greater shirk- 
ing in nonprofit, mutually owned enter- 
prises. (This suggests that nonprofit en- 
terprises are especially 
appropriate 
in 
realms of endeavor where more shirking is 
desired and where redirected uses of the 
enterprise in response to market-revealed 
values is less desired.) 
E. Partnerships 
Team production in artistic or profes- 
sional intellectual skills will more likely 
be by partnerships than other types of 
team production. This amounts to market- 
organized team activity 
and to a non- 
employer status. Self-monitoring partner- 
ships, therefore, will be used rather than 
employer-employee 
contracts, and these 
organizations will be small to prevent an 
excessive dilution of efforts through shirk- 
ing. Also, partnerships are more likely to 
occur among relatives or long-standing 
acquaintances, 
not necessarily 
because 
they share a common utility function, but 
also because each knows better the other's 
work characteristics 
and tendencies 
to 
shirk. 
F. Employee Unions 
Employee unions, whatever else they 
do, perform as monitors for employees. 
Employers monitor employees and simi- 
larly employees monitor an employer's per- 
formance. Are correct wages paid on time 
and in good currency? Usually, this is 
extremely easy to check. But some forms 
of employer performance are less easy to 
meter and are more subject to employer 
shirking. Fringe benefits often are in non- 
pecuniary, contingent form; medical, hos- 
pital, and accident insurance, and retire- 
ment pensions are contingent payments 
or performances partly in kind by em- 
ployers 
to employees. 
Each 
employee 
cannot judge the character of such pay- 
ments as easily as money wages. Insur- 
ance is a contingent payment-what 
the 
employee will get upon the contingent 
event may come as a disappointment. If 
he could easily determine what other 
employees 
had gotten 
upon such con- 
tingent events he could judge more ac- 
curately the performance by the employer. 
He could "trust" the employer not to 
shirk in such fringe contingent payments, 
but he would prefer an effective and eco- 
nomic monitor of those payments. We see 
a specialist monitor-the 
union employees' 
agent-hired 
by them and monitoring 
those aspects of employer payment most 
difficult for the employees to monitor. Em- 
ployees should be willing to employ a 
specialist 
monitor 
to 
administer 
such 
hard-to-detect 
employer 
performance, 
even though their monitor has incentives 
to use pension and retirement funds not 
entirely for the benefit of employees. 
V. Team Spirit and Loyalty 
Every team member would prefer a 
team in which no one, not even himself, 
shirked. Then the true marginal costs and 
values could be equated to achieve more 
preferred positions. If one could enhance 
a common interest in nonshirking in the 
guise of a team loyalty or team spirit, the 
team would be more efficient. In those 
sports where team activity is most clearly 
exemplified, the sense of loyalty and team 
spirit is most strongly urged. Obviously 
the team is better, with team spirit and 
loyalty, because of the reduced shirking- 
not because of some other feature in- 
herent in loyalty or spirit as such.'5 
15 Sports Leagues: Professional sports contests among 
teams is typically conducted by a league of teams. We 
assume that sports consumers are interested not only in 
absolute sporting skill but also in skills relative to other 
teams. Being slightly better than opposing teams en- 
ables one to claim a major portion of the receipts; the 


--- Page 15 ---
ALCHIAN AND DEMSETZ: 
ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
791 
Corporations and business firms try to 
instill a spirit of loyalty. This should not 
be viewed simply as a device to increase 
profits by over-working or misleading the 
employees, nor as an adolescent urge for 
belonging. It promotes a closer approxima- 
tion to the employees' potentially avail- 
able true rates of substitution 
between 
production and leisure and enables each 
team member to achieve a more preferred 
situation. The difficulty, of course, is to 
create economically that team spirit and 
loyalty. It can be preached with an aura 
of moral code of conduct 
a morality with 
literally the same basis as the ten com- 
mandments 
to restrict our conduct to- 
ward what we would choose if we bore our 
full costs. 
VI. Kinds of Inputs Owned 
by the Firm 
To this point the discussion has ex- 
amined why firms, as we have defined 
them, exist? That is, why is there an 
owner-employer 
who 
is 
the 
common 
party to contracts with other owners of 
inputs in team activity? The answer to 
that question should also indicate the kind 
of the jointly used resources likely to be 
owned by the central-owner-monitor and 
the kind likely to be hired from people 
who are not team-owners. Can we identify 
characteristics or features of various in- 
puts that lead to their being hired or to 
their being owned by the firm? 
How 
can residual-claimant, 
central- 
employer-owner 
demonstrate 
ability to 
pay the other hired inputs the promised 
amount in the event of a loss? He can pay 
in advance or he can commit wealth suf- 
ficient to cover negative residuals. The 
latter will take the form of machines, land, 
buildings, or raw materials committed to 
the firm. Commitments 
of labor-wealth 
(i.e., human wealth) given the property 
rights in people, is less feasible. These con- 
siderations suggest that residual claim- 
ants 
owners of the firm will be inves- 
tors of resalable capital equipment in the 
firm. The goods or inputs more likely to 
be invested, than rented, by the owners 
of the enterprise, will have higher resale 
values relative to the initial cost and will 
have longer expected use in a firm relative 
to the economic life of the good. 
But beyond these factors are those de- 
veloped above to explain the existence of 
inferior team does not release resources and reduce costs, 
since they were expected in the play of contest. Hence, 
absolute skill is developed beyond the equality of margi- 
nal investment in sporting skill with its true social 
marginal value product. It follows there will be a ten- 
dency to overinvest in training athletes and developing 
teams. "Reverse shirking" arises, as budding players 
are induced to overpractice hyperactively relative to the 
social marginal value of their enhanced skills. To pre- 
vent overinvestment, the teams seek an agreement with 
each other to restrict practice, size of teams, and even 
pay of the team members (which reduces incentives of 
young people to overinvest in developing skills). Ideally, 
if all the contestant teams were owned by one owner, 
overinvestment in sports would be avoided, much as 
ownership of common fisheries or underground oil or 
water reserve would prevent overinvestment. This 
hyperactivity (to suggest the opposite of shirking) is 
controlled by the league of teams, wherein the league 
adopts a common set of constraints on each team's be- 
havior. In effect, the teams are no longer really owned 
by the team owners but are supervised by them, much 
as the franchisers of some product. They are not full- 
fledged owners of their business, including the brand 
name, and can not "do what thev wish" as franchises. 
Comparable to the franchiser, is the league commis- 
sioner or conference president, who seeks to restrain 
hyperactivity, as individual team supervisors compete 
with each other and cause external diseconomies. Such 
restraints are usually regarded as anticompetitive, anti- 
social, collusive-cartel devices to restrain free open com- 
petition, and reduce players' salaries. However, the 
interpretation presented here is premised on an attempt 
to avoid hyperinvestment in team sports production. 
Of course, the team operators have an incentive, once 
the league is formed and restraints are placed on hyper- 
investment activity, to go further and obtain the private 
benefits of monopoly restriction. To what extent over- 
investment is replaced by monopoly restriction is not 
yet determinable; nor have we seen an empirical test of 
these two competing, but mutually consistent interpre- 
tations. (This interpretation of league-sports activity 
was proposed by Earl Thompson and formulated by 
Michael Canes.) Again, athletic teams clearly exemplify 
the specialization of monitoring with captains and 
coaches; a captain detects shirkers while the coach trains 
and selects strategies and tactics. Both functions may 
be centralized in one person. 


--- Page 16 ---
792 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
the institution known as the firm 
the 
costs of detecting output performance. 
When a durable resource is used it will 
have a marginal product and a deprecia- 
tion. Its use requires payment to cover at 
least use-induced depreciation; unless that 
user cost is specifically detectable, pay- 
ment for it will be demanded in accord 
with expected depreciation. And we can 
ascertain circumstances for each. An in- 
destructible hammer with a readily de- 
tectable marginal product has zero user 
cost. But suppose the hammer were de- 
structible and that 
careless (which is 
easier than careful) use is more abusive 
and causes greater depreciation of the 
hammer. Suppose in addition the abuse 
is easier to detect by observing the way it 
is used than by observing only the ham- 
mer after its use, or by measuring the 
output scored from a hammer by a 
laborer. If the hammer were rented and 
used in the absence of the owner, the de- 
preciation would be greater than if the use 
were observed by the owner and the user 
charged in accord with the imposed de- 
preciation. (Careless use is more likely 
than careful use-if 
one does not pay for 
the greater depreciation.) 
An absentee 
owner would therefore ask for a higher 
rental price because of the higher expected 
user cost than if the item were used by the 
owner. The expectation is higher because 
of the greater difficulty 
of observing 
specific user cost, by inspection of the 
hammer after use. Renting is therefore in 
this case more costly than owner use. This 
is the valid content of the misleading ex- 
pressions about ownership being more 
economical 
than 
renting 
ignoring 
all 
other factors that may work in the oppo- 
site direction, like tax provision, short- 
term occupancy and capital risk avoid- 
ance. 
Better examples are tools of the trade. 
Watch repairers, engineers, and carpenters 
tend to own their own tools especially if 
they are portable. Trucks are more likely 
to be employee owned rather than other 
equally expensive team inputs because it 
is relatively cheap for the driver to police 
the care taken in using a truck. Policing 
the use of trucks by a nondriver owner is 
more likely to occur for trucks that are 
not specialized to one driver, like public 
transit busses. 
The factor with which we are concerned 
here is one related to the costs of monitor- 
ing not only the gross product performance 
of an input but also the abuse or deprecia- 
tion inflicted on the input in the course of 
its use. If depreciation or user cost is more 
cheaply detected when the owner can see 
its use than by only seeing the input be- 
fore and after, there is a force toward 
owner use rather than renting. Resources 
whose user cost is harder to detect when 
used by someone else, tend on this count 
to be owner-used. Absentee ownership, in 
the lay language, will be less likely. As- 
sume momentarily that labor service can- 
not be performed in the absence of its 
owner. The labor owner can more cheaply 
monitor any abuse of himself than if some- 
how labor-services could be provided with- 
out the labor owner observing its mode of 
use or knowing what was happening. Also 
his incentive to abuse himself is increased 
if he does not own himself."6 
16 Professional athletes in baseball, football, and bas- 
ketball, where athletes having sold their source of 
service to the team owners upon entering into sports 
activity, are owned by team owners. Here the team 
owners must monitor the athletes' physical condition 
and behavior to protect the team owners' wealth. The 
athlete has less (not, no) incentive to protect or enhance 
his athletic prowess since capital value changes have less 
impact on his own wealth and more on the team owners. 
Thus, some athletes sign up for big initial bonuses 
(representing present capital value of future services). 
Future salaries are lower by the annuity value of the 
prepaid "bonus" and hence the athlete has less to lose by 
subsequent abuse of his athletic prowess. Any decline in 
his subsequent service value would in part be borne by 
the team owner who owns the players' future service. 
This does not say these losses of future salaries have no 
effect on preservation of athletic talent (we are not mak- 
ing a "sunk cost" error). Instead, we assert that the 


--- Page 17 ---
ALCHIAN AND DEMSETZ: ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
793 
The similarity between the preceding 
analysis and the question of absentee 
landlordism 
and of sharecropping 
ar- 
rangements is no accident. The same fac- 
tors which explain the contractual 
ar- 
rangements known as a firm help to explain 
the incidence of tenancy, labor hiring or 
sharecropping. 17 
VII. Firms as a Specialized Market 
Institution for Collecting, Collating, 
and Selling Input Information 
The firm serves as a highly specialized 
surrogate market. Any person contem- 
plating a joint-input activity must search 
and detect the qualities of available joint 
inputs. He could contact an employment 
agency, but that agency in a small town 
would have little advantage over a large 
firm with many inputs. The employer, by 
virtue of monitoring many inputs, ac- 
quires special superior information about 
their productive 
talents. This aids his 
directive (i.e., market hiring) efficiency. He 
"sells" his information to employee-inputs 
as he aids them in ascertaining good input 
combinations 
for team activity. 
Those 
who work as employees or who rent ser- 
vices to him are using him to discern su- 
perior combinations of inputs. Not only 
does the director-employer "decide" what 
each input will produce, he also estimates 
which heterogeneous inputs will work to- 
gether jointly more efficiently, and he 
does this in the context of a privately 
owned market for forming teams. The de- 
partment store is a firm and is a superior 
private market. People who shop and 
work in one town can as well shop and 
work in a privately owned firm. 
This marketing function is obscured in 
the theoretical literature by the assump- 
tion of homogeneous 
factors. Or it is 
tacitly left for individuals to do themselves 
via personal market search, much as if a 
person had to search without benefit of 
specialist retailers. Whether or not the 
firm arose because of this efficient in- 
formation service, it gives the director- 
employer 
more knowledge 
about 
the 
productive talents of the team's inputs, 
and a basis for superior decisions about 
efficient or profitable combinations 
of 
those heterogeneous resources. 
In other words, opportunities for profit- 
able team production by inputs already 
within the firm may be ascertained more 
economically and accurately than for re- 
sources outside the firm. Superior com- 
binations of inputs can be more econom- 
ically identified and formed from resources 
already used in the organization than by 
obtaining new resources (and knowledge 
of them) from the outside. Promotion and 
revisioni of employee assignments 
(con- 
tracts) will be preferred by a firm to the 
hiring of new inputs. To the extent that 
this occurs there is reason to expect the 
firm to be able to operate as a conglom- 
erate rather than persist in producing 
a single product. 
Efficient production 
with heterogeneous resources is a result 
not of having better resources but in know- 
ing more accurately the relative productive 
performances of those resources. Poorer 
resources can be paid less in accord with 
their 
inferiority; 
greater 
accuracy 
of 
preservation is reduced, not eliminated, because the 
amount of loss of wealth suffered is smaller. The athlete 
will spend less to maintain or enhance his prowess 
thereafter. The effect of this revised incentive system is 
evidenced in comparisons of the kinds of attention and 
care imposed on the athletes at the "expense of the 
team owner" in the case where atheletes' future servies 
are owned by the team owner with that where future 
labor service values are owned by the athlete himself. 
Why athletes' future athletic services are owned by the 
team owners rather than being hired is a question we 
should be able to answer. One presumption is carteliza- 
tion and monopsony gains to team owners. Another is 
exactly the theory being expounded in this paper-costs 
of monitoring production of athletes; we know not on 
which to rely. 
17 The analysis used by Cheung in explaining the 
prevalence of sharecropping and land tenancy arrange- 
ments is built squarely on the same factors-the 
costs 
of detecting output performance of jointly used inputs 
in team production and the costs of detecting user costs 
imposed on the various inputs if owner used or if rented. 


--- Page 18 ---
794 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
knowledge of the potential and actual pro- 
ductive actions of inputs rather than hav- 
ing high productivity resources makes a 
firm (or an assignment of inputs) profit- 
able.18 
VIII. Summary 
While ordinary contracts facilitate ef- 
ficient specialization 
according to com- 
parative advantage, a special class of con- 
tracts among a group of joint inputs to a 
team production 
process is commonly 
used for team production. 
Instead 
of 
multilateral contracts among all the joint 
inputs' owners, a central common party 
to a set of bilateral contracts facilitates 
efficient organization of the joint inguts in 
team production. The terms of the con- 
tracts form the basis of the entity called 
the firm-especially 
appropriate for or- 
ganizing team production processes. 
Team productive 
activity 
is that in 
which a union, or joint use, of inputs yields 
a larger output than the sum of the prod- 
ucts of the separately used inputs. This 
team production requires-like 
all other 
production processes 
an assessment 
of 
marginal productivities 
if efficient pro- 
duction is to be achieved. Nonseparability 
of the products 
of several differently 
owned joint inputs raises the cost of as- 
sessing 
the marginal productivities 
of 
those resources or services of each input 
owner. Monitoring or metering the pro- 
ductivities 
to match marginal produc- 
tivities to costs of inputs and thereby to 
reduce shirking can be achieved more 
economically (than by across market bi- 
lateral negotiations among inputs) in a 
firm. 
The essence of the classical firm is 
identified here as a contractual structure 
with: 1) joint input production; 2) several 
input owners; 3) one party who is com- 
mon to all the contracts of the joint in- 
puts; 4) who has rights to renegotiate any 
input's contract independently 
of con- 
tracts with other input owners; 5) who 
holds the residual claim; and 6) who has 
the right to sell his central contractual 
residual status. The central agent is called 
the firm's owner and the employer. No 
authoritarian control is involved; the ar- 
rangement is simply a contractual struc- 
ture subject to continuous renegotiation 
with the central agent. The contractual 
structure arises as a means of enhancing 
efficient organization of team production. 
In particular, the ability to detect shirk- 
ing among owners of jointly used inputs in 
team production is enhanced (detection 
costs are reduced) by this arrangement and 
the discipline (by revision of contracts) of 
input owners is made more economic. 
Testable implications are suggested by 
the analysis of different types of organiza- 
tions -nonprofit, 
proprietary for profit, 
unions, cooperatives, partnerships, and by 
the kinds of inputs that tend to be owned 
by the firm in contrast to those employed 
by the firm. 
We conclude with a highly conjectural 
18 According to our interpretation, the firm is a 
specialized surrogate for a market for team use of inputs; 
it provides superior (i.e., cheaper) collection and colla- 
tion of knowledge about heterogeneous resources. The 
greater the set of inputs about which knowledge of per- 
formance is being collated within a firm the greater are 
the present costs of the collation activity. Then, the 
larger the firm (market) the greater the attenuation of 
monitor control. To counter this force, the firm will be 
divisionalized in ways that economize on those costs- 
just as will the market be specialized. So far as we can 
ascertain, other theories of the reasons for firms have no 
such implications. 
In Japan, employees by custom work nearly their 
entire lives with one firm, and the firm agrees to that 
expectation. Firms will tend to be large and conglomer- 
ate to enable a broader scope of input revision. Each 
firm is, in effect, a small economy engaging in "intra- 
national and international" trade. Analogously, Amer- 
icans expect to spend their whole lives in the United 
States, and the bigger the country, in terms of variety 
of resources, the easier it is to adjust to changing tastes 
and circumstances. Japan, with its lifetime employees, 
should be characterized more by large, conglomerate 
firms. Presumably, at some size of the firm, specialized 
knowledge about inputs becomes as expensive to trans- 
mit across divisions of the firms as it does across markets 
to other firms. 


--- Page 19 ---
ALCHIAN AND DEMSETZ: ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
795 
but possibly significant interpretation. As 
a consequence of the flow of information 
to the central party (employer), the firm 
takes on the characteristic of an efficient 
market in that information about the pro- 
ductive characteristics of a large set of 
specific inputs is now more cheaply avail- 
able. Better recombinations or new uses of 
resources can be more efficiently ascer- 
tained than by the conventional search 
through the general market. In this sense 
inputs compete with each other within and 
via a firm rather than solely across markets 
as conventionally conceived. Emphasis on 
interfirm competition obscures intrafirm 
competition 
among inputs. 
Conceiving 
competition as the revelation and exchange 
of knowledge or information about quali- 
ties, potential uses of different inputs in 
different potential applications indicates 
that the firm is a device for enchancing 
competition among sets of input resources 
as well as a device for more efficiently re- 
warding the inputs. In contrast to markets 
and cities which can be viewed as publicly 
or nonowned market places, the firm can 
be considered a privately owned market; 
if so, we could consider the firm and the 
ordinary market as competing types of 
markets, 
competition 
between 
private 
proprietary markets and public or com- 
munal markets. Could it be that the 
market suffers from the defects of com- 
munal property rights in organizing and 
influencing uses of valuable resources? 
REFERENCES 
M. Canes, "A Model of a Sports League," un- 
published doctoral dissertation, UCLA 1970. 
S. N. Cheung, The Theory of Share Tenancy, 
Chicago 1969. 
R. H. Coase, "The Nature of the Firm," Eco- 
nomica, Nov. 1937, 4, 386-405; reprinted in 
G. J. Stigler and K. Boulding, eds., Readings 
in Price Theory, Homewood 1952, 331-51. 
E. Furobotn and S. Pejovich, "Property Rights 
and the Behavior of the Firm in a Socialist 
State," Zeitschrift 
fiir Nationalokonomie, 
1970,30,431-454. 
F. H. Knight, Risk, Uncertainty and Profit, 
New York 1965. 
S. Macaulay, "Non-Contractual Relations in 
Business: A Preliminary Study," Amer. So- 
ciological Rev., 1968, 28, 55-69. 
H. B. Malmgren, "Information, Expectations 
and the Theory of the Firm," Quart J. Econ., 
Aug. 1961, 75, 399-421. 
H. Manne, "Our Two Corporation Systems: 
Law and Economics," Virginia Law Rev., 
Mar. 1967, 53, No. 2, 259-84. 
S. Pejovich, "The Firm, Monetary Policy and 
Property Rights in a Planned Economy," 
Western Econ. J., Sept. 1969, 7, 193-200. 
M. Silver and R. Auster, "Entrepreneurship, 
Profit, and the Limits on Firm Size," J. Bus. 
Univ. Chicago, Apr. 1969, 42, 277-81. 
E. A. Thompson, "Nonpecuniary Rewards and 
the Aggregate Production Function," Rev. 
Econ. Statist., Nov. 1970, 52, 395-404. 
