--- Page 1 ---
Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                    ISSN 2313-4747 (Print); ISSN 2313-4755 (Online)                          
 
                             CC-BY-NC 2014, Asian Business Consortium | AJTP 
                                         Page 123 
 
Stock 
Market 
Prediction 
using 
Machine 
Learning: A Systematic Literature Review 
  
Siddhartha Vadlamudi 
 
Quixey Inc., Vintech Solutions, Comcast, Philadelphia, USA 
 
*E-mail for correspondence:  vadlamudisiddhartha@gmail.com 
 
 
Received: July 05, 2017                                       Accepted: Nov 27, 2017                                       Published: Dec 26, 2017 
 
Source of Support: Nil                                                                                                  No Conflict of Interest: Declared 
 
ABSTRACT 
Different machine learning algorithms are discussed in this literature review. These algorithms can be 
used for predicting the stock market. The prediction of the stock market is one of the challenging tasks 
that must have to be handled. In this paper, it is discussed how the machine learning algorithms can be 
used for predicting the stock value. Different attributes are identified that can be used for training the 
algorithm for this purpose. Some of the other factors are also discussed that can have an effect on the 
stock value. 
 
Keywords: Stock Market, Machine Learning, Predictive Algorithms  
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The stock market is the place where the buyers and sellers 
come for the purpose of buying the stocks and selling the 
stocks of a company. With the passage of time, more and 
more people are getting interested in the stock market. The 
increasing interest of the people makes this topic more 
important for the research. Machine learning provides the 
different predictive algorithms that can be very helpful in 
this domain. Different sectors are using the machine 
learning for their improvement. The use of machine 
learning enables the computers to learn without the 
involvement of any external program (Kumar, Krishna, 
Neelakanteswara, & Basha, 2020). These algorithms of the 
machine learning are first trained through a data set. This 
data set is called the training data set. The algorithm then 
makes the predictions according to the instructions that are 
given in the training data set.  
People now want to invest their money in the stock 
market on the basis of the prediction (Sharma, Bhuriya, & 
Singh, 2017).  From the past few years, the stock market 
prediction is one of the challenging tasks for the 
researchers (Gurav & Sidnal, 2018). The stock market 
prediction is the process of predicting the value of the 
stock of a company i.e. whether the value will be 
increased in future or it will be decreased (Hegazy, 
Soliman, & Salam, 2014). People buy the stocks, when 
there is the chance of an increase in the future value. This 
creates the need of using the machine learning for 
predicting the future value of the stocks of a company.  
The work is presented by the various researchers to 
predict the stock value. For the prediction purpose, the 
researchers created the different models using the 
predictive algorithms provided by the machine learning. 
Because machine learning has the ability to successfully 
forecast the stock price (Berry & Linoff, 2004; Vadlamudi, 
2016). Researchers in (Shen, Jiang, & Zhang, 2012) used 
the Support vector machine (SVM) to forecast the stock 
value of the next coming day. The economic growth of a 
country depends on the stock market. According to the 
researchers, the economic growth of a county goes down 
when the stock market is falling (Fama, 1965). 
Researchers (Sheta, 2006) developed the fuzzy models for 
the prediction of the stock market.  
This literature review is written to give a detailed 
summary of the different machine learning algorithms that 
are used by the various researchers. The work that is 
presented by various researchers will be described in this 
literature review. For the purpose of better understanding, 
the research question will be created and answered. The 
literature review is based on the papers from the various 
large databases. The further parts of this paper are 
formulated as: section 2 is about the methodology, section 
3 show the research questions of this paper, in section 4 the 
search process is described, section 5 is about the results 
and discussion, 6th section shows the conclusion.  


--- Page 2 ---
Vadlamudi: Stock Market Prediction using Machine Learning: A Systematic Literature Review                                                                                                                                            (123-128) 
Page 124                                                                                                                                                American Journal of Trade and Policy ● Vol 4 ● Issue 3/2017 
METHODOLOGY  
The methodology that is used for writing this literature 
review is the Systematic literature review (SLR). This is the 
methodology that helps in writing the literature review 
while answering the particular research questions. The 
questions of this literature review will be answered based 
on the word presented by the researchers in the past.  
Inclusion and Exclusion 
The google scholar contains a number of research papers, 
conference papers, etc. The selection of the most relevant 
papers is necessary as well as a challenging task. For the 
inclusion of the papers in this literature review, there was an 
inclusion criteria. This criteria ensures that the papers are 
written in the English language, completely available to study 
and are relevant to stock market prediction. All the papers 
that do not fulfill this inclusion criteria were excluded.  
Quality Assessment  
To write a good quality literature review it is necessary 
that the included papers must have the good quality. 
The quality of the papers was assessed before including 
them in this literature review. To assess the quality, the 
contribution of each research paper author was 
analyzed.  
RESEARCH QUESTION 
As it is mentioned above, that the systematic literature 
review must have to answer one or more research 
questions. In this part, the research questions of this 
literature review are created and presented. Below are the 
research questions of this systematic literature review.  
RQ 1: “Why the stock market prediction is necessary and 
how it helps the investors in taking the right decision?” 
RQ 2: “What are the different attributes and factors that 
can be used for predicting the stock market?” 
RQ 3: “What are the different machine learning predictive 
algorithms that are used by the researchers for predicting 
the stock market?” 
SEARCH PROCESS 
Different important and famous digital libraries were 
used for collecting the right papers for this literature 
review. These digital libraries include the Elsevier, 
ACM, IEEE, etc. The papers that were collected were the 
550. But not all of these papers were appropriate to be 
added to this literature review. For finding the most 
appropriate papers, a search process was followed. 
According to this search process, the papers were first 
included or excluded on the basis of their title. In the 
next phase of search process, the abstract of the 
remaining papers was studied. A lot of papers were 
excluded in this phase. In the last phase of the search 
process, complete papers were studied to be included or 
excluded. As a result, the remaining papers were 45.  
RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
Nowadays, predictions are made in different sectors to 
improve the progress. Making the prediction is a 
challenging task (D. Das, Uddin, & applications, 2013). The 
stock market prediction is one of the important and 
difficult activities because of the dynamic change in the 
values of the stock. This is one of the big issues in the 
finance field (Yoo, Kim, & Jan, 2005). This prediction can 
be done on the basis of the previous records of the stock 
market. Machine learning algorithms are very helpful in 
this regard. Researchers (Reddy & Technology, 2018) used 
the SVM algorithm for predicting the stock value. The 
programming language that is used by the researchers was 
python. They trained the algorithm with the previous data 
set of the stock market to predict the future value of the 
stock. Researchers (Huang, Nakamori, Wang, & research, 
2005) also used the SVM for the purpose of stock market 
prediction. They compared its results with the other 
classification methods and they found this algorithm is 
better 
than 
the 
different 
classification 
methods.  
Researchers (Qian & Rasheed, 2007) trained the different 
machine learning algorithms for predicting the stock 
market. The achieved accuracy was the 65 percent that can 
be improved by using the more effective attributes and 
training the algorithm with a large data set. The answers to 
the different created research questions are given below.  
RQ 1: “Why the stock market prediction is necessary and 
how it helps the investors in taking the right decision?” 
People are getting more and more interested in the stock 
market. They want to invest their money to get the benefit. 
But there is also the chance of losing the invested money or 
a loss instead of the benefit. The person will face a loss if 
he will invest in a stock whose future value will is going to 
be decreased. There is a need for the prediction about the 
future value of the stock. This prediction will help in 
earning the more money (Deepak, Uday, Malathi, & 
Mathematics, 2017). The interest of the investors is 
increasing towards the stock market prediction (Khan et 
al., 2020). Some of the stock markets are difficult to predict. 
According to the researchers (Khan et al., 2020), random 
forest is the best classifier for this kind of prediction 
because the accuracy provided by this classifier is 83%.  
Different kinds of events can affect the stock price. This 
makes the stock market prediction more challenging and 
difficult (Choudhry, Garg, & Technology, 2008). The 
investors want to gain more and more benefits but the 
human mind cannot give the correct prediction about the 
stock price. Machine learning must have to be used for this 
prediction purpose. According to the researchers (A.-S. 
Chen, Leung, Daouk, & Research, 2003; Vadlamudi, 2015), 
the more accurate prediction about the future stock value 
will result in more profit. This shows the importance and 
need of the stock market prediction for the investors. 
Researchers (Parmar et al., 2018), also said that the seller and 
broker can gain more benefits if the stock prices is predicted 
accurately. This prediction helps the investors to decide 


--- Page 3 ---
Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                    ISSN 2313-4747 (Print); ISSN 2313-4755 (Online)                          
 
                             CC-BY-NC 2014, Asian Business Consortium | AJTP 
                                         Page 125 
 
when they should buy at the lowest price and when to sell 
at the highest prices (Boone, Giorno, Richardson, & 
DEPARTMENT, 1998).  
RQ 2: “What are the different attributes and factors that 
can be used for predicting the stock market?” 
One of the highly researched topics is the search for a machine 
learning model that can predict the stock price with more 
accuracy (Henrique, Sobreiro, & Kimura, 2019). To train the 
machine learning algorithm, there must be a previous data 
set. This data set can contain the data in the form of various 
variables or attributes. A data set is required for the training 
of a machine learning algorithm so that it can be able to 
predict the future value of the stock. This data set can be based 
on a number of attributes. Researchers have trained their 
models with different attributes. However, some of the 
attributes are commonly used. A piece of news can also affect 
the stock price. News is considered as positive if it is the 
reason behind the stock value (Shah & Spring, 2007). The 
news can also have a negative impact or no impact. 
Researchers (Raza, 2017) created the machine learning model 
that is based on the different factors. Some of these factors are 
the prices of fuel, foreign exchange, commodity, foreign 
exchange and the news. Researchers studied the each factor 
independently to check its importance i.e. why this factor is 
helpful in predicting the stock price. They came to know that 
the change in the prices of fuel has a huge impact on the 
market performance. Researchers (Lee, Cho, Kwon, & Sohn, 
2019) applied the network indicators as an input for 
predicting the stock value. These indicators proved more 
important during the crisis period of the market. According 
to the researchers (Usmani, Adil, Raza, & Ali, 2016), there are 
the six different factors that affect the stock market. The value 
of the stock market change according to these factors. These 
are the “Market History, The News, General Public Mood, 
Commodity Price, Interest Rate, Foreign Exchange”. 
Researchers (Kohara, Ishikawa, Fukuhara, Nakamura, & 
Management, 1997), combined the event knowledge with the 
machine learning algorithm to predict the stock price. The 
experiment has shown that the combination of event 
knowledge with other attributes increased the accuracy by 
five percent. A positive event can be the reason behind the 
increase in stock price. The event information can be extracted 
from the news. As shown in the below figure: 
  
Figure 1: “Event Knowledge Extraction” 
Various researchers said that combining the event 
information with neural network algorithm can improve 
the prediction accuracy (Gabriel Pui Cheong Fung, Yu, & 
Lam, 2002) (Hong & Han, 2002) (Hong & Han, 2004) 
(Kohara, 2003) (Mittermayer, 2004) (G Pui Cheong Fung, 
Yu, & Lam, 2003). The below table shows the different 
commonly used attributes. 
Table 1: "Commonly used attributes" 
Oil Rates 
Gold Rates 
FEX 
SMA 
Silver Rates  
ARIMA 
News 
Twitter 
Different macroeconomic factors can also influence the 
trend of the stock. Researchers (Hu, Zhu, & Tse, 2013) 
highlighted some of these macroeconomic factors. These 
include the “consumer spending, consumer investment, 
unemployment rate, inflation rate, federal funds rate”. 
RQ 3: “What are the different machine learning 
predictive algorithms that are used by the researchers for 
predicting the stock market?” 
Different algorithms of machine learning are used by the 
various researchers for the stock market prediction. These 
algorithms are trained and applied to the different data sets. 
Different attributes are used by the researchers for 
improving the prediction accuracy. The prediction accuracy 
is very important for the investors. The accuracy of the 
algorithm can save the investors from the loss and helps 
them to earn more profit. Below is the table that shows the 
various algorithms that are used by the researchers.  
Table 2: "Algorithms for predicting stock market" 
Linear Regression 
Neural Network 
Genetic Algorithm 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) 
K-Nearest Neighbor  
Random Forest 
Linear Regression 
This is a machine learning algorithm that belongs to the 
supervised category. This algorithm predicts the values that 
are in a range instead of predicting the category. For example, 
it can predict the sales, prices etc. Researchers (Bhuriya, 
Kaushal, Sharma, & Singh, 2017) used this algorithm for 
predicting the stock market. The researchers said that the 
prediction of daily stock value is a serious challenge that must 
be handled. With the prediction of this algorithm, the 
investors can invest the money with more confidence.  
Neural Network 
This is the unsupervised machine learning algorithm that 
consists of the number of nodes and each node performs 
some computation. Various researchers have used this 
algorithm for the stock price prediction. Researchers 
(Naeini, Taremian, & Hashemi, 2010) used this algorithm 
for predicting the stock market. Researchers (Adebiyi, 
Ayo, Adebiyi, Otokiti, & Sciences, 2012) trained this 
algorithm with different variables to predict the stock 
value so that the investors can take the correct decisions. 
This algorithm can also be trained for this purpose, 
through the news from different social media platforms 
(W. Chen, Zhang, Yeo, Lau, & Lee, 2017).  
Genetic Algorithm 
Researchers (Bonde & Khaled, 2012) used this algorithm 
for predicting whether the value of the stocks is going to 


--- Page 4 ---
Vadlamudi: Stock Market Prediction using Machine Learning: A Systematic Literature Review                                                                                                                                            (123-128) 
Page 126                                                                                                                                                American Journal of Trade and Policy ● Vol 4 ● Issue 3/2017 
be increased or decreased in the next coming day. They 
used the six attributes to train the algorithm for this 
purpose. 
Researchers 
(Naik, 
Ramesh, 
Manjula, 
Govardhan, & Systems, 2012) also used this algorithm for 
predicting the price movement of the stocks.  
SVM 
Researchers (Lin, Guo, & Hu, 2013) used an approach 
based on this algorithm to predict the future trend of the 
stock. Researchers (Y. Chen & Hao, 2017) also used this 
algorithm for the prediction of stock market indices. 
Researchers (S. P. Das & Padhy, 2012) compared the two 
different algorithms and they found SVM is better in 
predicting the future value of the stocks.  
K-Nearest Neighbor 
This algorithm can also help the investors in investing the 
money at the right time by predicting the stock value at an 
initial stage (Alkhatib, Najadat, Hmeidi, Shatnawi, & 
Technology, 2013). Researchers (Imandoust, Bolandraftar, 
& Applications, 2013) said that the KNN can be used in the 
finance sector for predicting the stock values and to decide 
the best time to buy and sell the stocks.  
Random Forest 
This algorithm can be helpful to minimize the risk while 
investing in the stock market (Khaidem, Saha, & Dey, 
2016). The investors can invest the more money if there is 
a minimal risk of investment. Researchers (GHOLAMIAN 
& DAVOODI, 2018) achieved 64% accuracy in predicting 
the future stock value by using this algorithm.  
Below is the diagram that shows how a machine learning 
algorithm is trained and used for predicting the future 
value of the stock.  
 
Figure 2: Algorithm training for stock market prediction 
CONCLUSION 
Prediction of the stock value is very important for investors. 
With the help of an accurate prediction, the investors can 
gain more and more profit. Taking the decision about when 
to buy and when to sell is very hard for the investors. The 
algorithm through the machine learning algorithms can be 
very helpful in making this decision. Investors can take the 
risk of investment easily when they have an idea about the 
future value of the stocks. Different researchers have 
worked for predicting the future values of the stock. This 
work is discussed in this paper so that the reader should not 
have to read all the papers. 
REFERENCES 
Adebiyi, A. A., Ayo, C. K., Adebiyi, M. O., Otokiti, S. O. J. J. o. E. 
T. i. C., & Sciences, I. (2012). Stock price prediction using 
neural network with hybridized market indicators. 3(1), 1-9.  
Alkhatib, K., Najadat, H., Hmeidi, I., Shatnawi, M. K. A. J. I. J. o. 
B., Humanities, & Technology. (2013). Stock price prediction 
using k-nearest neighbor (kNN) algorithm. 3(3), 32-44.  
Berry, M. J., & Linoff, G. S. (2004). Data mining techniques: for 
marketing, sales, and customer relationship management: John 
Wiley & Sons. 
Bhuriya, D., Kaushal, G., Sharma, A., & Singh, U. (2017). Stock 
market predication using a linear regression. Paper presented at 
the 
2017 
international 
conference 
of 
electronics, 
communication and aerospace technology (ICECA). 
Bonde, G., & Khaled, R. (2012). Stock price prediction using genetic 
algorithms and evolution strategies. Paper presented at the 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Genetic and 
Evolutionary Methods (GEM). 
Boone, L., Giorno, C., Richardson, P. J. W. P.-O. F. E. C., & 
DEPARTMENT, D. E. (1998). Stock Market Fluctuations and 
Consumption Behaviour: Some Recent Evidence Economics 
Department Working Papers No. 208.  
Chen, A.-S., Leung, M. T., Daouk, H. J. C., & Research, O. (2003). 
Application of neural networks to an emerging financial 
market: forecasting and trading the Taiwan Stock Index. 
30(6), 901-923.  
Chen, W., Zhang, Y., Yeo, C. K., Lau, C. T., & Lee, B. S. (2017). 
Stock market prediction using neural network through news on 
online social networks. Paper presented at the 2017 
international smart cities conference (ISC2). 
Chen, Y., & Hao, Y. J. E. S. w. A. (2017). A feature weighted 
support vector machine and K-nearest neighbor algorithm 
for stock market indices prediction. 80, 340-355.  
Choudhry, R., Garg, K. J. W. A. o. S., Engineering, & Technology. 
(2008). A hybrid machine learning system for stock market 
forecasting. 39(3), 315-318.  
Das, D., Uddin, M. S. J. I. j. o. a. i., & applications. (2013). Data 
mining and neural network techniques in stock market 
prediction: A methodological review. 4(1), 117.  
Das, S. P., & Padhy, S. J. I. J. o. C. A. (2012). Support vector 
machines for prediction of futures prices in Indian stock 
market. 41(3).  
Deepak, R. S., Uday, S. I., Malathi, D. J. I. J. o. P., & Mathematics, 
A. (2017). Machine learning approach in stock market 
prediction. 115(8), 71-77.  


--- Page 5 ---
Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                    ISSN 2313-4747 (Print); ISSN 2313-4755 (Online)                          
 
                             CC-BY-NC 2014, Asian Business Consortium | AJTP 
                                         Page 127 
 
Fama, E. F. J. T. j. o. B. (1965). The behavior of stock-market prices. 
38(1), 34-105.  
Fung, G. P. C., Yu, J. X., & Lam, W. (2002). News sensitive stock trend 
prediction. Paper presented at the Pacific-Asia Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 
Fung, G. P. C., Yu, J. X., & Lam, W. (2003). Stock prediction: 
Integrating text mining approach using real-time news. Paper 
presented at the 2003 IEEE International Conference on 
Computational Intelligence for Financial Engineering, 2003. 
Proceedings. 
GHOLAMIAN, E., & DAVOODI, S. M. R. (2018). Predicting the 
direction of stock market prices using random forest.  
Gurav, U., & Sidnal, N. (2018). Predict Stock Market Behavior: 
Role of Machine Learning Algorithms. In Intelligent 
Computing and Information and Communication (pp. 383-394): 
Springer. 
Hegazy, O., Soliman, O. S., & Salam, M. A. J. a. p. a. (2014). A 
machine learning model for stock market prediction.  
Henrique, B. M., Sobreiro, V. A., & Kimura, H. J. E. S. w. A. (2019). 
Literature review: Machine learning techniques applied to 
financial market prediction. 124, 226-251.  
Hong, T., & Han, I. J. E. S. (2004). Integrated approach of cognitive 
maps and neural networks using qualitative information on 
the World Wide Web: the KBNMiner. 21(5), 243-252.  
Hong, T., & Han, I. J. E. s. w. a. (2002). Knowledge-based data 
mining of news information on the Internet using cognitive 
maps and neural networks. 23(1), 1-8.  
Hu, Z., Zhu, J., & Tse, K. (2013). Stocks market prediction using 
support vector machine. Paper presented at the 2013 6th 
International Conference on Information Management, 
Innovation Management and Industrial Engineering. 
Huang, W., Nakamori, Y., Wang, S.-Y. J. C., & research, o. (2005). 
Forecasting stock market movement direction with support 
vector machine. 32(10), 2513-2522.  
Imandoust, S. B., Bolandraftar, M. J. I. J. o. E. R., & Applications. 
(2013). Application of k-nearest neighbor (knn) approach for 
predicting economic events: Theoretical background. 3(5), 
605-610.  
Khaidem, L., Saha, S., & Dey, S. R. J. a. p. a. (2016). Predicting the 
direction of stock market prices using random forest.  
Khan, W., Ghazanfar, M. A., Azam, M. A., Karami, A., Alyoubi, 
K. H., Alfakeeh, A. S. J. J. o. A. I., & Computing, H. (2020). 
Stock market prediction using machine learning classifiers 
and social media, news. 1-24.  
Kohara, K. (2003). Selective-learning-rate approach for stock market 
prediction by simple recurrent neural networks. Paper presented 
at the International Conference on Knowledge-Based and 
Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems. 
Kohara, K., Ishikawa, T., Fukuhara, Y., Nakamura, Y. J. I. S. i. A., 
Finance, & Management. (1997). Stock price prediction using 
prior knowledge and neural networks. 6(1), 11-22.  
Kumar, V. U., Krishna, A., Neelakanteswara, P., & Basha, C. Z. 
(2020). Advanced Prediction of Performance of a Student in an 
University 
using 
Machine 
Learning 
Techniques. 
Paper 
presented at the 2020 International Conference on Electronics 
and Sustainable Communication Systems (ICESC). 
Lee, T. K., Cho, J. H., Kwon, D. S., & Sohn, S. Y. J. E. S. w. A. (2019). 
Global stock market investment strategies based on financial 
network indicators using machine learning techniques. 117, 
228-242.  
Lin, Y., Guo, H., & Hu, J. (2013). An SVM-based approach for 
stock market trend prediction. Paper presented at the The 
2013 international joint conference on neural networks 
(IJCNN). 
Mittermayer, M.-A. (2004). Forecasting intraday stock price trends 
with text mining techniques. Paper presented at the 37th 
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, 2004. Proceedings of the. 
Naeini, M. P., Taremian, H., & Hashemi, H. B. (2010). Stock market 
value prediction using neural networks. Paper presented at the 
2010 international conference on computer information 
systems and industrial management applications (CISIM). 
Naik, R. L., Ramesh, D., Manjula, B., Govardhan, A. J. C. E., & 
Systems, I. (2012). Prediction of stock market index using 
genetic algorithm. 3(7), 162-171.  
Parmar, I., Agarwal, N., Saxena, S., Arora, R., Gupta, S., Dhiman, 
H., & Chouhan, L. (2018). Stock market prediction using 
Machine Learning. Paper presented at the 2018 First 
International Conference on Secure Cyber Computing and 
Communication (ICSCCC). 
Qian, B., & Rasheed, K. J. A. I. (2007). Stock market prediction with 
multiple classifiers. 26(1), 25-33.  
Raza, K. (2017). Prediction of Stock Market performance by using 
machine learning techniques. Paper presented at the 2017 
International Conference on Innovations in Electrical 
Engineering 
and 
Computational 
Technologies 
(ICIEECT). 
Reddy, V. K. S. J. I. R. J. o. E., & Technology. (2018). Stock market 
prediction using machine learning. 5(10), 1033-1035.  
Shah, V. H. J. F. o. M. L., & Spring. (2007). Machine learning 
techniques for stock prediction. 1(1), 6-12.  
Sharma, A., Bhuriya, D., & Singh, U. (2017). Survey of stock market 
prediction using machine learning approach. Paper presented at 
the 
2017 
International 
conference 
of 
electronics, 
communication and aerospace technology (ICECA). 
Shen, S., Jiang, H., & Zhang, T. J. D. o. E. E., Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA. (2012). Stock market forecasting using machine 
learning algorithms. 1-5.  
Sheta, A. (2006). Software effort estimation and stock market prediction 
using takagi-sugeno fuzzy models. Paper presented at the 2006 
IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems. 
Usmani, M., Adil, S. H., Raza, K., & Ali, S. S. A. (2016). Stock market 
prediction using machine learning techniques. Paper presented 
at the 2016 3rd international conference on computer and 
information sciences (ICCOINS). 
Yoo, P. D., Kim, M. H., & Jan, T. (2005). Machine learning techniques 
and use of event information for stock market prediction: A survey 
and evaluation. Paper presented at the International 
Conference on Computational Intelligence for Modelling, 
Control and Automation and International Conference on 
Intelligent 
Agents, 
Web 
Technologies 
and 
Internet 
Commerce (CIMCA-IAWTIC'06). 
Vadlamudi, S. (2015). Enabling Trustworthiness in Artificial 
Intelligence 
- 
A 
Detailed 
Discussion. Engineering 
International, 3(2), 
105-114. 
https://doi.org/10.18034/ei.v3i2.519 


--- Page 6 ---
Vadlamudi: Stock Market Prediction using Machine Learning: A Systematic Literature Review                                                                                                                                            (123-128) 
Page 128                                                                                                                                                American Journal of Trade and Policy ● Vol 4 ● Issue 3/2017 
Vadlamudi, S. (2016). What Impact does Internet of Things have 
on Project Management in Project based Firms?. Asian 
Business 
Review, 6(3), 
179-186. 
https://doi.org/10.18034/abr.v6i3.520 
--0-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  2171 Monroe Avenue, Suite 203, Rochester, NY 14618, USA 
http://www.ssrn.com/en/ 
 
AJTP Link: http://www.ssrn.com/link/American-Journal-Trade-Policy.html 
