--- Page 1 ---
A survey on feature selection methods q
Girish Chandrashekar ⇑, Ferat Sahin
Electrical and Microelectronic Engineering, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623, USA
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Available online 7 December 2013
a b s t r a c t
Plenty of feature selection methods are available in literature due to the availability of data
with hundreds of variables leading to data with very high dimension. Feature selection
methods provides us a way of reducing computation time, improving prediction perfor-
mance, and a better understanding of the data in machine learning or pattern recognition
applications. In this paper we provide an overview of some of the methods present in lit-
erature. The objective is to provide a generic introduction to variable elimination which can
be applied to a wide array of machine learning problems. We focus on Filter, Wrapper and
Embedded methods. We also apply some of the feature selection techniques on standard
datasets to demonstrate the applicability of feature selection techniques.
 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
A feature is an individual measurable property of the process being observed. Using a set of features, any machine learn-
ing algorithm can perform classiﬁcation. In the past years in the applications of machine learning or pattern recognition, the
domain of features have expanded from tens to hundreds of variables or features used in those applications. Several tech-
niques are developed to address the problem of reducing irrelevant and redundant variables which are a burden on challeng-
ing tasks. Feature Selection (variable elimination) helps in understanding data, reducing computation requirement, reducing
the effect of curse of dimensionality and improving the predictor performance. In this paper we look at some of the methods
found in literature which use particular measurements to ﬁnd a subset of variables (features) which improves the overall
prediction performance.
The focus of feature selection is to select a subset of variables from the input which can efﬁciently describe the input data
while reducing effects from noise or irrelevant variables and still provide good prediction results [1]. One of the applications
would be in gene microarray analysis [1–5]. The standardized gene expression data can contain hundreds of variables of
which many of them could be highly correlated with other variables (e.g. when two features are perfectly correlated, only
one feature is sufﬁcient to describe the data). The dependant variables provide no extra information about the classes and
thus serve as noise for the predictor. This means that the total information content can be obtained from fewer unique fea-
tures which contain maximum discrimination information about the classes. Hence by eliminating the dependent variables,
the amount of data can be reduced which can lead to improvement in the classiﬁcation performance. In some applications,
variables which have no correlation to the classes serve as pure noise might introduce bias in the predictor and reduce the
classiﬁcation performance. This can happen when there is a lack of information about the process being studied. By applying
feature selection techniques we can gain some insight into the process and can improve the computation requirement and
prediction accuracy.
To remove an irrelevant feature, a feature selection criterion is required which can measure the relevance of each feature
with the output class/labels. From a machine learning point if a system uses irrelevant variables, it will use this information
0045-7906/$ - see front matter  2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2013.11.024
q Reviews processed and approved for publication by Editor-in-Chief Dr. Manu Malek.
⇑Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 5857540555.
E-mail addresses: gxc6334@rit.edu (G. Chandrashekar), feseee@rit.edu (F. Sahin).
Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers and Electrical Engineering
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/compeleceng


--- Page 2 ---
for new data leading to poor generalization. Removing irrelevant variables must not be compared with other dimension
reduction methods such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [6] since good features can be independent of the rest of
the data [7]. Feature elimination does not create new features since it uses the input features itself to reduce their number.
Once a feature selection criterion is selected, a procedure must be developed which will ﬁnd the subset of useful features.
Directly evaluating all the subsets of features (2N) for a given data becomes an NP-hard problem as the number of features
grow. Hence a suboptimal procedure must be used which can remove redundant data with tractable computations.
In this paper we will look at some of these methods developed for this purpose. In [8], the variable elimination methods
were broadly classiﬁed into ﬁlter and wrapper methods. Filter methods act as preprocessing to rank the features wherein the
highly ranked features are selected and applied to a predictor. In wrapper methods the feature selection criterion is the per-
formance of the predictor i.e. the predictor is wrapped on a search algorithm which will ﬁnd a subset which gives the highest
predictor performance. Embedded methods [1,9,10] include variable selection as part of the training process without split-
ting the data into training and testing sets. In this paper we will focus on feature selection methods using supervised learning
algorithms and a very brief introduction to feature selection methods using unsupervised learning will be presented.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 Filter methods are presented followed by Wrapper methods in
Section 3. Section 4 provides a brief overview of the Embedded methods. In Section 5 we present brieﬂy other feature selec-
tion techniques for unsupervised and semi-supervised learning and in Section 6 we present a brief discussion on the stability
of the feature selection algorithms followed by Section 7 where we look at two classiﬁers which can be used for feature
selection. In Section 8 we present some of the results obtained by applying the feature selection algorithms and ﬁnally in
Section 9 we present the conclusion.
2. Filter methods
Filter methods use variable ranking techniques as the principle criteria for variable selection by ordering. Ranking meth-
ods are used due to their simplicity and good success is reported for practical applications. A suitable ranking criterion is
used to score the variables and a threshold is used to remove variables below the threshold. Ranking methods are ﬁlter
methods since they are applied before classiﬁcation to ﬁlter out the less relevant variables. A basic property of a unique fea-
ture is to contain useful information about the different classes in the data. This property can be deﬁned as feature relevance
[8] which provides a measurement of the feature’s usefulness in discriminating the different classes.
Here the issue of relevancy of a feature has to be raised i.e. how do we measure the relevancy of a feature to the data or
the output. Several publications [1,8–11] have presented various deﬁnitions and measurements for the relevance of a var-
iable. One deﬁnition that can be mentioned which will be useful for the following discussion is that ‘‘A feature can be re-
garded as irrelevant if it is conditionally independent of the class labels.’’ [7]. It essentially states that if a feature is to be
relevant it can be independent of the input data but cannot be independent of the class labels i.e. the feature that has no
inﬂuence on the class labels can be discarded. As mentioned above inter feature correlation plays an important role in deter-
mining unique features. For practical applications the underlying distribution is unknown and is measured by the classiﬁer
accuracy. Due to this, an optimal feature subset may not be unique because it may be possible to achieve the same classiﬁer
accuracy using different sets of features.
Next we will look into two ranking methods which will help us understand the relevance of a feature. For the rest of the
paper we use a standard notation to represent data and the variables. The input data ½xij; yk consists of N samples i ¼ 1 to N
with D variables j ¼ 1 to D; xi is the ith sample and yk is the class label k ¼ 1 to Y.
2.1. Correlation criteria
One of the simplest criteria is the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient [1,12] deﬁned as:
RðiÞ ¼
covðxi; YÞ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
varðxiÞ  varðYÞ
p
ð1Þ
where xi is the ith variable, Y is the output (class labels), covðÞ is the covariance and varðÞ the variance. Correlation ranking
can only detect linear dependencies between variable and target.
2.2. Mutual Information (MI)
Information theoretic ranking criteria [1,5,8,12–14] use the measure of dependency between two variables. To describe
MI we must start with Shannons deﬁnition for entropy given by:
HðYÞ ¼ 
X
y
pðyÞlogðpðyÞÞ
ð2Þ
Eq. (2) represents the uncertainty (information content) in output Y. Suppose we observe a variable X then the conditional
entropy is given by:
G. Chandrashekar, F. Sahin / Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28
17


--- Page 3 ---
HðYjXÞ ¼ 
X
x
X
y
pðx; yÞlogðpðyjxÞÞ
ð3Þ
Eq. (3) implies that by observing a variable X, the uncertainty in the output Y is reduced. The decrease in uncertainty is given
as:
IðY; XÞ ¼ HðYÞ  HðYjXÞ
ð4Þ
This gives the MI between Y and X meaning that if X and Y are independent then MI will be zero and greater than zero if they
are dependent. This implies that one variable can provide information about the other thus proving dependency. The deﬁ-
nitions provided above are given for discrete variables and the same can be obtained for continuous variables by replacing
the summations with integrations. The MI can also be deﬁned as a distance measure given by:
Kðf; gÞ ¼
Z
fðyÞlog
fðyÞ
gðyÞ


ð5Þ
The measure K in (5) is the Kullback–Leibler divergence [15,16] between two densities which can also be used as a measure
of MI. From the above equations, we need to know the probability density function (PDF) of the variables to calculate MI.
Since the data we obtain is of ﬁnite samples, the PDF cannot be calculated accurately. Several methods have been developed
for estimating the MI in [12,15,16]. Once a particular method is chosen for calculating MI then one of the simplest methods
for feature selection is to ﬁnd the MI between each feature and the output class labels and rank them based on this value. A
threshold is set to select d < D features. This is a simple method and the results can be poor [13] since inter-feature MI is not
taken into account. But MI is an important concept and is used in embedded methods which will be presented in a later
section.
In [17] the author develops a feature ranking criteria based on Conditional Mutual Information for binary data (boolean
data). A score table is updated as features are selected to the subset using the conditional mutual information criteria which
is to be maximized. The score at each iteration is calculated using (6) given by:
s½n ¼ minl<kbIðY; XnjXmðlÞÞ
ð6Þ
where s½n is the score which is updated at each iteration, Xn is the current evaluated feature, XmðlÞ is the set of already se-
lected features. The above equation iteratively selects features which maximize MI with the class and not select features
similar to ones already picked. This provides a good trade-off between independence and discrimination.
Since the data distribution is not known, various techniques can be used to evaluate different subsets with a chosen clas-
siﬁer. Other statistical tests found in literature can be used for feature ranking. In [13] twelve feature selection metrics are
considered for the text classiﬁcation problem [1,13,18]. All the features are ranked using each metric and a threshold is set
which would select 100 words which are then applied to the predictor. Filter approaches applied to various applications can
be found in [19–21,18,5]. Earlier comparisons for text classiﬁcation using ranking methods can be found in [22]. In [23,24]
the authors develop a ranking criteria based on class densities for binary data. A two stage algorithm utilizing a less expen-
sive ﬁlter method to rank the features and an expensive wrapper method to further eliminate irrelevant variables is used.
The RELIEF algorithm [25,26] is another ﬁlter based approach wherein a feature relevance criterion is used to rank the fea-
tures. Using a threshold a subset of features is selected. The drawback of the RELIEF algorithm is in selecting a threshold.
Authors in [26] compare the RELIEF and other wrapper methods for different datasets. In [19] discarded variables are used
to perform multitask learning (MTL). In [27] a random variable called probe is used to rank the features using Gram-Schmidt
orthogonalization.
The advantages of feature ranking are that it is computationally light and avoids overﬁtting and is proven to work well for
certain datasets [1,28,5]. Filter methods do not rely on learning algorithms which are biased which is equivalent to changing
data to ﬁt the learning algorithm. One of the drawbacks of ranking methods is that the selected subset might not be optimal
in that a redundant subset might be obtained. Some ranking methods such as Pearson correlation criteria (1) and MI (4) do
not discriminate the variables in terms of the correlation to other variables. The variables in the subset can be highly corre-
lated in that a smaller subset would sufﬁce [11,28]. This issue of redundant vs. relevant variables is addressed in [1] with
good examples. In feature ranking, important features that are less informative on their own but are informative when com-
bined with others could be discarded [1,29]. Finding a suitable learning algorithm can also become hard since the underlying
learning algorithm is ignored [11]. Also, there is no ideal method for choosing the dimension of the feature space.
In the next section, we will look at the second type of feature selection method called Wrapper methods. Unlike ﬁlter
methods which use a feature relevance criteria, Wrapper methods rely on the classiﬁcation for obtaining a feature subset.
3. Wrapper methods
Wrapper methods use the predictor as a black box and the predictor performance as the objective function to evaluate the
variable subset. Since evaluating 2N subsets becomes a NP-hard problem, suboptimal subsets are found by employing search
algorithms which ﬁnd a subset heuristically. A number of search algorithms can be used to ﬁnd a subset of variables which
maximizes the objective function which is the classiﬁcation performance. The Branch and Bound method [8,30] used tree
structure to evaluate different subsets for the given feature selection number. But the search would grow exponentially
18
G. Chandrashekar, F. Sahin / Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28


--- Page 4 ---
[8] for higher number of features. Exhaustive search methods can become computationally intensive for larger datasets.
Therefore simpliﬁed algorithms such as sequential search or evolutionary algorithms such as Genetic Algorithm (GA) [31]
or Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [32] which yield local optimum results are employed which can produce good results
and are computationally feasible.
We broadly classify the Wrapper methods into Sequential Selection Algorithms and Heuristic Search Algorithms. The
sequential selection algorithms start with an empty set (full set) and add features (remove features) until the maximum
objective function is obtained. To speed up the selection, a criteria is chosen which incrementally increases the objective
function until the maximum is reached with the minimum number of features. The heuristic search algorithms evaluate dif-
ferent subsets to optimize the objective function. Different subsets are generated either by searching around in a search-
space or by generating solutions to the optimization problem. First we will look at sequential selection algorithms followed
by the heuristic search algorithms.
3.1. Sequential selection algorithms
These algorithms are called sequential due to the iterative nature of the algorithms. The Sequential Feature Selection (SFS)
algorithm [33,34] starts with an empty set and adds one feature for the ﬁrst step which gives the highest value for the objec-
tive function. From the second step onwards the remaining features are added individually to the current subset and the new
subset is evaluated. The individual feature is permanently included in the subset if it gives the maximum classiﬁcation accu-
racy. The process is repeated until the required number of features are added. This is a naive SFS algorithm since the depen-
dency between the features is not accounted for. A Sequential Backward Selection (SBS) algorithm can also be constructed
which is similar to SFS but the algorithm starts from the complete set of variables and removes one feature at a time whose
removal gives the lowest decrease in predictor performance.
The Sequential Floating Forward Selection (SFFS) [33,34] algorithm is more ﬂexible than the naive SFS because it intro-
duces an additional backtracking step. The basic ﬂowchart is given in Fig. 1 where k is the current subset size and d is the
required dimension. The ﬁrst step of the algorithm is the same as the SFS algorithm which adds one feature at a time based
on the objective function. The SFFS algorithm adds another step which excludes one feature at a time from the subset ob-
tained in the ﬁrst step and evaluates the new subsets. If excluding a feature increases the value of the objective function then
that feature is removed and goes back to the ﬁrst step with the new reduced subset or else the algorithm is repeated from the
top. This process is repeated until the required number of features are added or required performance is reached.
Fig. 1. SFFS ﬂow chart.
G. Chandrashekar, F. Sahin / Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28
19


--- Page 5 ---
The SFS and SFFS methods suffer from producing nested subsets since the forward inclusion was always unconditional
which means that two highly correlated variables might be included if it gave the highest performance in the SFS evaluation.
To avoid the nesting effect, adaptive version of the SFFS was developed in [35,36]. The Adaptive Sequential Forward Floating
Selection (ASFFS) algorithm used a parameter r which would specify the number of features to be added in the inclusion
phase which was calculated adaptively. The parameter o would be used in the exclusion phase to remove maximum number
of features if it increased the performance. The ASFFS attempted to obtain a less redundant subset than the SFFS algorithm. It
can be noted that a statistical distance measure can also be used as the objective function for the search algorithms as done
in [9,10,33,35]. Theoretically, the ASFFS should produce a better subset than SFFS but this is dependent on the objective func-
tion and the distribution of the data. The Plus-L-Minus-r search method [35,37,38] also tries to avoid nesting. In the Plus-L-
Minus-r search, in each cycle L variables were added and r variables were removed until the desired subset was achieved.
The parameters L and r have to be chosen arbitrarily. In [37] the authors try to improve the SFFS algorithm by adding an extra
step after the backtracking step in the normal SFFS in which a weak feature is replaced with a new better feature to form the
current subset.
3.2. Heuristic search algorithms
Genetic Algorithm (GA) [31] can be used to ﬁnd the subset of features [36,39–42] wherein the chromosome bits represent
if the feature is included or not. The global maximum for the objective function can be found which gives the best suboptimal
subset. Here again the objective function is the predictor performance.
The GA parameters and operators can be modiﬁed within the general idea of an evolutionary algorithm to suit the data or
the application to obtain the best performance or the best search result. A modiﬁed version of the GA called the CHCGA
[43,44] can be used for feature selection [36]. The CHCGA is a non-traditional GA which differs from GA in the following
ways:
 The best N individuals are chosen from the pool of parents and offspring i.e. better offspring replaces lesser ﬁt parents.
 A highly disruptive half uniform crossover (HUX) operator is used which crosses over exactly half of the non-matching
alleles, wherein the bits to be crossed over are selected at random.
 During reproduction step, each member of the parent population is randomly selected without replacement and paired
for mating. Not all the pairs are crossed over but before mating the Hamming distance between the parents are calculated
and if half this distance does not exceed a threshold d, they are not mated. The threshold is usually initialized to L=4
where L is the chromosome length. If no offspring is obtained in the generation, the threshold is decremented by one.
Due to these mating criteria of mating only diverse parents, the population converges as the threshold decreases.
 If there are no offspring generated and the threshold drops to zero, a cataclysmic mutation is introduced to create a new
population. The best individual in the current parent population is taken as the template to create the new population.
The rest N  1 individuals are obtained by randomly ﬂipping a percentage (35–40%) of bits of the template. The regular
mutation after crossover step is skipped each time and the above mentioned mutation is carried if required.
The CHCGA converges on the solution faster and provides a more effective search by maintaining the diversity and avoid-
ing stagnation of the population. In [45] multi-objective GA is used for hand written digit recognition. In [46,47] several
wrapper methods some of which mentioned above, are compared with different datasets. They derive various ﬁtness func-
tions with weighting/penalty imposing characteristics. A binary PSO [32,48,4] algorithm can also be used for wrapper imple-
mentation. In [49] comparison between GA and PSO using SVM for gene selection can be found.
The main drawback of Wrapper methods is the number of computations required to obtain the feature subset. For each
subset evaluation, the predictor creates a new model i.e. the predictor is trained for each subset and tested to obtain the clas-
siﬁer accuracy. If the number of samples is large, most of the algorithm execution is spent in training the predictor. In some
algorithms such as GA feature selection, the same feature subset might be evaluated multiple times since the classiﬁer accu-
racies for evaluated subsets are not stored for future retrieval. Another drawback of using the classiﬁer performance as the
objective function is that the classiﬁers are prone to overﬁtting [8]. Overﬁtting occurs if the classiﬁer model learns the data
too well and provides poor generalization capability. The classiﬁer can introduce bias and increases the classiﬁcation error.
Using classiﬁcation accuracy in subset selection can result in a bad feature subset with high accuracy but poor generalization
power. To avoid this, a separate holdout test set can be used to guide the prediction accuracy of the search [8].
In the next section, we will discuss Embedded methods which try to compensate for the drawbacks in the Filter and
Wrapper methods.
4. Embedded methods
Embedded methods [1,9,10] want to reduce the computation time taken up for reclassifying different subsets which is
done in wrapper methods. The main approach is to incorporate the feature selection as part of the training process. In Section
2 we mentioned that MI is an important concept but the ranking using MI yielded poor results since the MI between the
feature and the class output only was considered. In [12] a greedy search algorithm is used to evaluate the subsets. The
20
G. Chandrashekar, F. Sahin / Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28


--- Page 6 ---
objective function is designed such that choosing a feature will maximize the MI between the feature and the class output
while the MI between the selected feature and the subset of the so far selected features is a minimum. This is formulated as:
IðY; fÞ  b
X
s2S
Iðf; sÞ
ð7Þ
where Y is the output, f is the current selected feature, s is the feature in the already selected subset S and b controls the
importance of the MI between the current feature f and the features in the subset S. The output subset is applied to a Neural
Network classiﬁer. Eq. (7) will select better subset since the inter-feature MI is used in the calculation to select the non-
redundant features. An improvement of this method is presented in [14] which estimates the MI using Parzen window
method.
The mRMR (max-relevancy, min-redundancy) [24] is another method based on MI. It uses similar criteria as in (7) given
as:
Iðxj; CÞ 
1
m  1
X
xl2Sm1
Iðxj; xlÞ
ð8Þ
where xi is the mth feature in subset S and the set Sm1 is the so far selected subset with m  1 features. Instead of a greedy
algorithm a two stage approach is implemented. First the criterion (8) is used to select a number k which is the optimal num-
ber of features which gives the lowest cross-validation classiﬁcation error. In the second stage, wrapper methods are used to
evaluate different subsets of size k or direct evaluations are done on different subsets to ﬁnd the subset which consistently
yields the smallest classiﬁcation error. The application of mRMR can be found in [50,3] wherein the simplest incremental
search method is used with four different classiﬁers for gene classiﬁcation.
Another method used in literature is to use the weights of a classiﬁer [1,2,50] to rank the feature for their removal. Let wj
be deﬁned as:
wj ¼ ljðþÞ  ljðÞ
rjðþÞ þ rjðÞ
ð9Þ
where ljðþÞ and ljðÞ are the mean of the samples in class (+) and () and rj is the variance of the respective classes and j =
1 to D. Eq. (9) [2] can be used as a ranking criteria to sort the features. The rank vector w can be used to classify since features
rank proportionally contributes to the correlation. A voting scheme given as:
DðxÞ ¼ wðx  lÞ
ð10Þ
where w is the rank of the features or weight, D(x) is the decision and l is the mean of the data. Hence the weights (rank) of
the features can be used as classiﬁer weights. By conducting sensitivity analysis [1,2] of the weights, feature selection can be
done i.e. the change in the weight wj can be viewed as removing a feature j. In [2] it is suggested to use the change in the
objective function, a linear discriminant function J which is a function of wj. This concept of using the weights as the ranking
and the search is done using the change in the objective function is applied to the SVM classiﬁer [2,51,50] to perform Recur-
sive Feature Elimination or known as the SVM-RFE method. The objective function of the SVM is presented later in Section 7.
The SVM-RFE method in [2] is proposed for binary class classiﬁcation, its multi-class classiﬁcation technique can be found in
[52]. In [53] the authors use the concept of RFE to derive a modiﬁed algorithm for selecting features in hyper spectral image
data. In the SVM-RFE method, the l2 norm is used in the SVM minimization problem. It is shown in the literature that other
norms can be used which help in feature selection. In [54] the authors provide a comprehensive review of the different SVM
based feature selection methods. The paper also presents a non-linear classiﬁcation and feature selection approaches using
SVM.
Similar to optimizing the SVM equation and assigning weight to features, the same can be done using Neural Networks.
Multilayer perceptron networks are trained and feature weights are calculated using a saliency measure calculated from the
trained network [55,56]. In [55] a penalty is applied for features with small magnitude at the node and the nodes connecting
to these input features are excluded. This type of node removal is also called Network Pruning [55,56] is commonly used to
obtain the optimum network architecture for Neural Networks. In [57] the authors derive a cost function for random variable
elimination. In chemometric applications [58–60] regression models are developed to reduce the number of variables which
helps in analyzing the chemical properties. In [19] the discarded variables are used to improve the prediction performance
using multitask learning (MTL) approach. Lazy Feature Selection (LFS) approach is developed in [61] where the authors take
advantage of the sparseness in the feature space as a feature selection method for text categorization problem. The LFS ranks
the test samples against all training samples and k-NN [18,6] type algorithm is used to determine the class.
So far we have discussed the feature selection techniques using supervised learning i.e. the output class labels of the data
were known or could be calculated. In practical applications, there can be processes whose operational details are unknown
but their operational data is available. In the next section we will brieﬂy look at some of the articles which apply feature
selection using unsupervised learning.
G. Chandrashekar, F. Sahin / Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28
21


--- Page 7 ---
5. Other feature selection techniques
Unsupervised learning deals with ﬁnding hidden structure in unlabelled data. Clustering techniques [7] are a primary
example of unsupervised learning which tries to discover natural groupings in a set of objects without knowledge of class
labels. Feature selection using unsupervised learning techniques are beyond the scope of this paper and will not be discussed
in detail but in this section we mention a few articles which perform unsupervised feature selection. Feature selection using
unsupervised learning can provide better description and reliability of the data than just unsupervised learning [7]. Several
papers that attempt to solve the feature selection using unsupervised learning can be found in [7,62–65].
Semi-supervised learning is another class wherein both labelled and unlabelled data are used for learning [7,29,66,67]. It
uses both labelled data (less number of samples) and unlabelled data (abundantly available) to modify a hypothesis obtained
from labelled data alone. In [67] the authors use a clustering indicator construction to score a set of features. In [29]
the authors use the maximum margin principle (SVM) using manifold regularization problem optimization similar to
SVM-RFE [2].
Ensemble feature selection [68,69] is a relatively new technique used to obtain a stable feature subset. A single feature
selection algorithm is run on different subsets of data samples obtained from bootstrapping method. The results are
aggregated to obtain a ﬁnal feature set. Authors in [68,69] use ﬁlter methods to rank the genes/features and use different
aggregation methods such as ensemble-mean, linear aggregation, weighted aggregation methods to obtain the ﬁnal feature
subset.
6. Stability of feature selection algorithms
For a particular application, various feature selection algorithms can be applied and the best one can be selected which
meets the required criteria. An overlooked problem is the stability of the feature selection algorithms. Stability of a feature
selection algorithm can be viewed as the consistency of an algorithm to produce a consistent feature subset when new train-
ing samples are added or when some training samples are removed [68,70–73]. If the algorithm produces a different subset
for any perturbations in the training data, then that algorithm becomes unreliable for feature selection. Examples of insta-
bilities are demonstrated in [70,73] which can be veriﬁed by changing the training set and running the algorithm again. In
[70], wrapper techniques are used to study their instability and stability measures are introduced along with possible solu-
tions to alleviate the problem. Various measures are established in [68,70–72] to evaluate different subsets obtained for a
certain number of runs. Using these measures, a more robust subset can be found for different datasets. In [73] multicriterion
fusion algorithm is developed which uses multiple feature selection algorithms to rank/score the features which are com-
bined to obtain a robust subset based on combining multiple classiﬁers to improve the accuracy. In [74] the author also sug-
gests dividing the input features (based on their feature extraction procedures) to obtain different classiﬁers and combine
the predictions to obtain a ﬁnal decision.
7. Classiﬁers
In this section we want to provide a brief introduction to two classiﬁers in literature which can be used for feature selec-
tion tasks. We will present the SVM and RBF classiﬁers due to their wide range of applications found in literature.
7.1. Support Vector Machine (SVM)
SVM [51,2,24,18] is a marginal classiﬁer which maximizes the margin between the data samples in the two classes. An
optimal hyperplane boundary is drawn which will separate the data. In SVM, kernels are used to map the input data to a
higher dimensional space where a decision boundary can be constructed. The decision function is given as:
DðxÞ ¼ w/ðxÞ þ b
ð11Þ
where w and b are the SVM parameters and /ðxÞ is a kernel function that maps the input data into the new M dimension. Eq.
(11) deﬁnes the hyperplane and
DðxÞ
kwk
ð12Þ
is the distance between hyperplane and pattern x. In Fig. 2 (taken from [51]) a graphical illustration of the boundary and the
samples is provided. The objective of the training algorithm is to ﬁnd w such that M⁄ is maximized. For the linear decision
function in (11), the parameters are given as:
w ¼
X
k
akykxk
ð13Þ
b ¼ ðyk  w  xkÞ
ð14Þ
22
G. Chandrashekar, F. Sahin / Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28


--- Page 8 ---
The vector w is a linear combination of training patterns wherein ak is non-zero for the marginal patterns which forms the
support vectors. The value b is an average over the support vectors. The objective function of the training algorithm is:
J ¼
1
2
 
kwk2
ð15Þ
For the SVM-RFE method described in Section 3, Eq. (13) gives the feature ranking criteria. To solve the objective in (15) qua-
dratic programming methods have to be used. These methods are not easy to implement when compared to other classiﬁer
algorithms. Libraries like LIBSVM [75] can be used to implement wrapper techniques. Since SVM is a binary classiﬁer, in this
paper we use the one-vs-all classiﬁcation technique for multiclass problems. In one-vs-all approach, different binary classi-
ﬁers are trained wherein each one is trained to distinguish samples of a single class from all the remaining samples. It is a
simple method which is proven to be robust and accurate when compared to other approaches [53,76].
7.2. Radial Basis Function Network
A Radial Basis Function Network [6,77] (RBFN or RBF) is a type of feed-forward Neural Network. The network structure
consists of three layers: input layer, hidden layer and output layer as shown in Fig. 3. The input layer consists of a single D
dimensional input. The hidden layer is composed of radially symmetric Gaussian kernels given by:
/j ¼ e

kxxjk2
r2
ð16Þ
where j = 1 to M, M being the number of kernels, xj the jth kernel centroid and /j is calculated for every input data vector. The
output layer node is connected to each kernel in the hidden layer with a weight Wj. The output Y can be calculated using the
equation:
Y ¼
X
M
j¼1
Wj/j
ð17Þ
In the training phase the weight vector is calculated for all the samples in the training set. The weight vector can be calcu-
lated using:
Fig. 2. Maximum margin for linear decision function D(x) [10].
Fig. 3. Radial Basis Function Network structure.
G. Chandrashekar, F. Sahin / Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28
23


--- Page 9 ---
W ¼ /1:Y
ð18Þ
where the / matrix element /ij gives the value of /j for the ith sample. For the testing set the output values can be calculated
for each data using (18) since the weight vector is known in the training phase. To ﬁnd the centroids of the kernel function,
clustering algorithms [77–81] are employed to enhance the generalizing capability of the classiﬁer. In [78] the RBF network
is used to EEG data classiﬁcation wherein three clustering methods for the RBF are explored.
7.3. Validation methods
It is also important to choose validation method (classiﬁer accuracy) for the chosen classiﬁer. This method is known as
cross-validation in which the input data is split into training and testing sets and the test set (unseen by the method or clas-
siﬁer) is validated against the training set to check if the classiﬁer can reproduce the known output. Several types of cross-
validation are used in literature. One of the simplest methods is the 2-fold cross-validation wherein the data is randomly
split into training and test sets. An extension of the 2-fold cross-validation is the K-fold cross-validation in which the data
is randomly split into K subsets. For training K  1 subsets are chosen and the remaining subset is used for testing. This pro-
cess is repeated until all the subsets are used for testing. Another version of the K-fold cross-validation is the Leave-one out
cross-validation (LOOCV) wherein K is equal to the number of samples i.e. each sample is used for testing and the rest of the
samples are used for training. This process is done until all the samples are tested. For model selection (feature selection or
classiﬁer) the training set may be further split into training and validation sets. The prediction of the validation set is used to
reinforce the model selection. In [34] the authors address the problem of over ﬁtting found when comparisons of the feature
selections are made. The authors argue the cross-validation methods can contribute to over estimating the model perfor-
mance. The author tests the SFS and SFFS method on various datasets with k-NN [18,6] classiﬁer as the wrapper. They
use the 2-fold and LOOCV cross-validation methods to compare the results of the two feature selection algorithms.
8. Results
In this section we present results of applying some of the feature selection algorithms on seven datasets using the two
classiﬁers mentioned in Section 7. We implement two ﬁlter methods given by (1) and (4) wherein the features are ranked
and the performance is obtained for the top ranked feature and subsequently adding the next ranked feature one by one to
cover the whole feature set. For the MI criteria, the MI is found for each feature and the output class. In wrapper techniques
we implement the SFFS algorithm and the CHCGA algorithm with the performance of the two classiﬁers as the objective
function. Out of the seven datasets, ﬁve are from the UCI Machine Learning Repository [82] and the sixth is Fault Mode data
from MKS Instruments. The Fault Mode data is obtained from a 5kW, 40 MHz RF Power generator from MKS Instruments. The
generator consists of several subsystems including an AC/DC converter, RF Power Ampliﬁer, RF Sensor, and Digital Control
System given in Fig. 4.
Sensors are designed into the RF generator to provide accurate power delivery and facilitate health monitoring during
critical semiconductor/thin ﬁlm processing steps. The data used in the study was created by intentionally seeding various
faults and collecting generator sensor data during an automated RF power sweep designed in LabViewTM. The seventh
dataset is the discrete Fault Mode data obtained by applying histogram to the continuous data. The number of variables
in each dataset is given in Table 1. The datasets are divided into 50% training and 50% testing sets and the performance
measure was the prediction accuracy of the test set. For all the results, the test set was not shown to the feature selection
algorithm. LIBSVM [75] library was used to implement the SVM classiﬁer. For the RBF classiﬁer, clustering must be
performed to determine the optimum number of kernels, variance and their respective centres for (16). As suggested in
[78] we perform an exhaustive search using k-means [6] technique to determine the RBF kernel centres. Since the input
to the classiﬁer varies according to the subset selected by the feature selection algorithm, using the parameters obtained
from the whole dataset will bring down the efﬁciency of the classiﬁer and results will not be accurate. Due to this, clustering
must be done for each subset which would increase the number of computations signiﬁcantly. To reduce the number of
Fig. 4. RF Generator block diagram.
24
G. Chandrashekar, F. Sahin / Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28


--- Page 10 ---
computations we ﬁrst ﬁnd the number of kernels using the exhaustive search in range D to 2⁄D. The variance in (16) is found
each time by searching in the range [0.1, 0.2, 0.3, . . .10]. By doing this we obtain better classiﬁcation. To avoid indirectly
learning the test data, the RBF exhaustive search is done on the training data itself. For the CHCGA algorithm, the GA param-
eters are: population size = 40, mutation rate = 0.4, maximum number of generations = 800. The data from the RF generator
was also used to perform fault prediction analysis using the above mentioned algorithms which can be found in [83].
In Fig. 5 the result for the ﬁrst ranking method is given. The x-axis is the number of features and the y-axis is the perfor-
mance of the subset containing the speciﬁed number of features. Fig. 6 gives the result for the MI criteria (4), Fig. 7 gives the
result of applying SFFS algorithm with SVM as the wrapper and Fig. 8 gives the result of applying SFFS with RBF as the wrap-
per. In Fig. 5 we can see that the performance for the ﬁrst ranked feature of Cancer and Ionosphere give low performance due
to the calculation of MI. Since we are approximating the PDF of a single feature and the output class distribution, calculation
of MI will not be accurate and is easily inﬂuenced by marginal densities [22]. The irregular graph for the ﬁlter methods also
Table 1
Number of variables in the datasets used.
Dataset
No. of Features
Breast cancer
10
Diabetes
8
Ionosphere
34
Liver disorder
6
Medical
19
Fault mode
16
Fig. 5. Results for correlation criteria using SVM.
Fig. 6. Result for MI using SVM.
G. Chandrashekar, F. Sahin / Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28
25


--- Page 11 ---
proves that the ranking methods are trivial. Since SFFS can produce only one subset, we generate subsets of lower size by
backward elimination or a subset with larger number of features by forward addition to the subset selected by SFFS. By doing
this we can see that the maximum performance is always obtained from the SFFS algorithm and the performance of all other
subsets are either equal to or lower than the maximum performance. Fig. 8 gives the results of applying SFFS using RBF clas-
siﬁer with the optimization procedure stated above. It can be seen in Fig. 8 that the graph does not give a clear idea of the
feature selection due to optimization of RBF parameters for each subset. If the sample values are close to the centre of the
kernel, the weight contribution will be higher. It can be noticed in Fig. 7 that for Liver Disorder data the performance is the
same for any subset which is interesting since the same result is not obtained from RBF due to the optimization of the RBF
classiﬁer.
In Table 2 we give the results of running the CHCGA algorithm with objective to ﬁnd the subset that has the maximum
classiﬁer performance using SVM. We can see that the results in Fig. 7 and Table 2 are close. Table 3 gives the results of run-
ning the CHCGA algorithm with RBF as the wrapper.
Fig. 7. Results for SFFS using SVM.
Fig. 8. Results for SFFS using RBF.
Table 2
Experimental results for CHCGA with SVM.
Dataset
Maximum performance
No. of selected features
Breast cancer
97.361
5
Diabetes
80.469
7
Ionosphere
94.286
16
Liver disorder
57.558
4
Medical
73.2
8
FaultMode
76.392
6
FaultMode (discrete)
98.829
6
26
G. Chandrashekar, F. Sahin / Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28


--- Page 12 ---
9. Conclusion
In this paper we have tried to provide an introduction to feature selection techniques. The literature on feature selection
techniques is very vast encompassing the applications of machine learning and pattern recognition. Comparison between
feature selection algorithms can only be done using a single dataset since each underlying algorithm will behave differently
for different data.
Feature selection techniques show that more information is not always good in machine learning applications. We can
apply different algorithms for the data at hand and with baseline classiﬁcation performance values we can select a ﬁnal fea-
ture selection algorithm. For the application at hand, a feature selection algorithm can be selected based on the following
considerations: simplicity, stability, number of reduced features, classiﬁcation accuracy, storage and computational require-
ments. Overall applying feature selection will always provide beneﬁts such as providing insight into the data, better classiﬁer
model, enhance generalization and identiﬁcation of irrelevant variables. For the results in this paper we use the classiﬁer
accuracy and the number of reduced features to compare the feature selection techniques. We have also successfully used
feature selection for improving predictor performance and for fault prediction analysis of Fault Mode data.
References
[1] Guyon I, Elisseeff A. An introduction to variable and feature selection. J Mach Learn Res 2003;3:1157–82.
[2] Guyon I, Weston J, Barhill S, Vapnik V. Gene selection for cancer classiﬁcation using support vector machines. Mach Learn 2002;46:389–422.
[3] Ding C, Peng H. Minimum redundancy feature selection from microarray gene expression data. J Bioinform Comput Biol 2005;3:185–205.
[4] Chuang L-Y, Chang H-W, Tu C-J, Yang C-H. Improved binary PSO for feature selection using gene expression data. Comput Biol Chem 2008;32:29–38.
[5] Lazar C, Taminau J, Meganck S, Steenhoff D, Coletta A, Molter C, et al. A survey on ﬁlter techniques for feature selection in gene expression microarray
analysis. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform 2012;9.
[6] Alpaydin E. Introduction to machine learning. The MIT Press; 2004.
[7] Law MH, Figueiredo M rio AT, Jain AK. Simultaneous feature selection and clustering using mixture models. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell
2004;26.
[8] Kohavi R, John GH. Wrappers for feature subset selection. Artif Intell 1997;97:273–324.
[9] Langley P. Selection of relevant features in machine learning. In: AAAI fall symp relevance; 1994.
[10] Blum AL, Langley P. Selection of relevant features and examples in machine learning. Artif Intell 1997;97:245–70.
[11] John GH, Kohavi R, Pﬂeger K. Irrelevant features and the subset selection problem. In: Proc 11th int conf mach learn; 1994. p. 121–9.
[12] Battiti R. Using mutual information for selecting features in supervised neural net learning. IEEE Trans Neural Networks 1994;5.
[13] Forman G. An extensive empirical study of feature selection metrics for text classiﬁcation. J Mach Learn Res 2003;3:1289–306.
[14] Kwak N, Choi C-H. Input feature selection for classiﬁcation problems. IEEE Trans Neural Networks 2002;13:143–59.
[15] Comon P. Independent component analysis a new concept? Signal Process 1994;36:287–314.
[16] Torkkola K. On feature extraction by non-parametric mutual information maximization. J Mach Learn Res 2003;3:1415–38.
[17] Fleuret F. Fast binary feature selection with conditional mutual information. Mach Learn Res 2004;5:1531–55.
[18] Bekkerman R, El-Yaniv R, Tishby N, Winter Y. Distributional word clusters vs. words for text categorization. J Mach Learn Res 2003;3:1245–64.
[19] Caruana R, de S V. Beneﬁtting from the variables that variable selection discards. J Mach Learn Res 2003;3:1245–64.
[20] Koller D, Sahami M. Towards optimal feature selection. In: ICML, vol. 96; 1996. p. 284–92.
[21] Davidson JL, Jalan J. Feature selection for steganalysis using the mahalonobis distance. In: Proc SPIE 7541, Media Forensics and Security II 7541; 2010.
[22] Yang Y, Perdersen JO. A comparative study on feature selection in text categorization. International conference on machine learning; 1997.
[23] Javed K, Babri HA, Saeed M. Feature selection based on class-dependent densities for high-dimensional binary data. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng
2010;24.
[24] Peng H, Long F, Ding C. Feature selection based on mutual information: criteria of max-dependency, max-relevance, and min-redundancy. IEEE Trans
Pattern Anal Mach Intell 2005;27.
[25] Kira K, Rendell LA. The feature selection problem: traditional methods and a new algorithm. In: Proceedings of tenth national conference on artiﬁcial
intelligence; 1992. p. 129–34.
[26] Acuna E, Coaquira F, Gonzalez M. A comparison of feature selection procedures for classiﬁer based on kernel density estimation. Proc Comput Commun
Control Technol 2003;1:468–72.
[27] Stoppiglia H, Dreyfus G, Dubios R, Oussar Y. Ranking a random feature for variable and feature selection. J Mach Res 2003;3:1399–414.
[28] Liu H, Setiono R. A probabilistic approach to feature selection a ﬁlter solution. In: International conference on machine learning - ICML; 1996. p. 319–
27.
[29] Xu Z, King I, Lyu MR-T, Jin R. Discriminative semi-supervised feature selection via manifold regularization. IEEE Trans Neural Networks 2010;21.
[30] Narendra P, Fukunaga K. A branch and bound algorithm for feature subset selection. IEEE Trans Comput 1977;6:917–22.
[31] Goldberg D. Genetic algorithms in search, optimization and machine learning. Addison-Wesley; 1989.
[32] Kennedy J, Eberhart RC. Particle swarm optimization. In: Proc IEEE int’l conf on neural networks, IV; 1995. p. 1942–1948.
[33] Pudil P, Novovicova J, Kittler J. Floating search methods in feature selection. Pattern Recog Lett 1994;15:1119–25.
[34] Reunanen J. Overﬁtting in making comparisons between variable selection methods. J Mach Learn Res 2003;3:1371–82.
[35] Pudil P, Novovicova J, Kittler J, Paclik P. Adaptive ﬂoating search methods in feature selection. Pattern Recog Lett 1999;20:1157–63.
Table 3
Experimental results for CHCGA with RBF.
Dataset
Maximum performance
No. of selected features
Breast cancer
96.774
5
Diabetes
76.822
7
Ionosphere
94.285
16
Liver disorder
72.675
4
Medical
70
8
FaultMode
79.639
6
FaultMode (discrete)
82.799
6
G. Chandrashekar, F. Sahin / Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28
27


--- Page 13 ---
[36] Sun Y, Babbs C, Delp E. A comparison of feature selection methods for the detection of breast cancers in mammograms: adaptive sequential ﬂoating
search vs. genetic algorithm. Conf proc IEEE eng med biol soc, vol. 6.
[37] Nakariyakul S, Casasent DP. An improvement on ﬂoating search algorithms for feature subset selection. Pattern Recog 2009;42:1932–40.
[38] Stearns S. On selecting features for pattern classiﬁers. In: Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on pattern recognition; 1976. p. 71–5.
[39] Alexandridis A, Patrinos P, Sarimveis H, Tsekouras G. A two-stage evolutionary algorithm for variable selection in the development of rbf neural
network models. Chemomet Intell Lab Syst 2005;75:149–62.
[40] Jouan-Rimbaud D, Massart DL, Leardi R, Noord OED. Genetic algorithms as a tool for wavenumber selection in multivariate calibration. Anal Chem 67.
[41] Yang J, Honavar V. Feature subset selection using a genetic algorithm. IEEE Intell Syst Appl 1998;13:44–9.
[42] Puch W, Goodman E, Pei M, Chia-Shun L, Hovland P, Enbody R. Further research on feature selection and classiﬁcation using genetic algorithm. In
International conference on genetic algorithm; 1993. p. 557–64.
[43] Eshelman L. The CHC adaptive search algorithm: how to have safe search when engaging in nontraditional genetic recombination. In: Rawlins GJE,
editor. In foundations of genetic algorithms. Morgan Kauffman; 1991.
[44] Cordon O, Damas S, Santamaria J. Feature-based image registration by means of the chc evolutionary algorithm. Image Vis Comput 2006;24:525–33.
[45] Oliveira L, Sabourin R, Bortolozzi F, Suen C. A methodology for feature selection using multiobjective genetic algorithms for handwritten digit sting
recognition. Int J Pattern Recog Artif Intell 2003;17:903–29.
[46] Ferri F, Pudil P, Hatef M, Kittler J. Comparative study of techniques for large-scale feature selection. Pattern Recog Pract 1994:403–13.
[47] Kudo M, Sklansky J. Comparison of algorithms that select features for pattern classiﬁers. Pattern Recog 2000;33:327–36.
[48] Tu C-J, Chuang L-Y, Chang J-Y, Yang C-H. Feature selection using pso-svm. Int J Comput Sci 2006;33.
[49] Alba E, Garcia-Nieto J, Jourdan L, Talbi E-G. Gene selection in cancer classiﬁcation using pso/svm and ga/svm hybrid algorithms. Evol Comput
2007:284–90.
[50] Mundra PA, Rajapakse JC. Svm-rfe with mrmr ﬁlter for gene selection. IEEE Trans Nanobiosci 2010;9.
[51] Boser B, Guyon I, Vapnik V. A training algorithm for optimal margin classiﬁers. In: In ﬁfth annual workshop on computational learning theory; 1992. p.
144–52.
[52] Chapelle O, Keerthi SS. Multi-class feature selection with support vector machines; 2008.
[53] Archibald R, Fann G. Feature selection and classiﬁcation of hyperspectral images with support vector machines. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Lett 2007;4.
[54] Neumann J, Schnorr C, Steidl G. Combined svm-based feature selection and classiﬁcation. Mach Learn 2005;61:129–50.
[55] Setiono R, Liu H. Neural-network feature selector. IEEE Trans Neural Networks 1997;8:654–62.
[56] Romero E, Sopena JM. Performing feature selection with multilayer perceptrons. IEEE Trans Neural Networks 2008;19.
[57] Stracuzzi DJ, Utgoff PE. Randomized variable elimination. J Mach Learn 2004;5:1331–64.
[58] Wu D, Zhou Z, Feng S, He Y. Uninformation variable elimination and successive projections algorithm in mid-infrared spectra wavenumber selection.
Image Signal Process 2009.
[59] Centner V, Massart D-L, de Noord OE, de Jong S, Vandeginste BM, Sterna C. Elimination of uninformative variables for multivariate calibration. Anal
Chem 1996;68:3851–8.
[60] Alsberg BK, Woodward AM, Winson MK, Rowl JJ, Kell DB. Variable selection in wavelet regression models. Anal Chim Acta 1998;368:29–44.
[61] Peng Y, Xuefeng Z, Jianyong Z, Yunhong X. Lazy learner text categorization algorithm based on embedded feature selection. J Syst Eng Electron
2009;20:651–9.
[62] Xing E, Karp R. Cliff: clustering of high-dimensional microarray data via iterative feature ﬁltering using normalized cuts. In: 9th International
conference on intelligence systems for molecular biology; 2001.
[63] Pudil P, Novovicova J, Kittler J. Feature selection based on the approximation of class densities by ﬁnite mixtures of the special type. Pattern Recog
1995;28:1389–98.
[64] Mitra P, Murthy C, Pal SK. Unsupervised feature selection using feature similarity. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 2002;24.
[65] Pal SK, De RK, Basak J. Unsupervised feature evaluation: a neuro-fuzzy approach. IEEE Trans Neural Networks 2000;11.
[66] Zhu X. Semi-supervised learning literature survey. Tech rep 1530, computer sciences. University of Wisconsin-Madison; 2005.
[67] Zhao Z, Liu H. Semi-supervised feature selection via spectral analysis. In: Proc 7th SIAM data mining conf (SDM); 2007. p. 641–6.
[68] Haury A-C, Gestraud P, Vert J-P. The inﬂuence of feature selection methods on accuracy, stability and interpretability of molecular signatures. PLoS
ONE 2011;6:e28210.
[69] T A, T H, de Peer Y V, P D, Y S. Robust biomarker identiﬁcation for cancer diagnosis with ensemble feature selection methods. Bioinformatics
2010;26:392–8.
[70] Dunne K, Cunningham P, Azuaje F. Solutions to instability problems with sequential wrapper-based approaches to feature selection. Tech rep, Trinity
College; 2002.
[71] Kalousis A, Prados J, Hilario M. Stability of feature selection algorithms: a study on high dimensional spaces. Knowl Inform Syst 2007;2:95–116.
[72] Somol P, Novovicova J. Evaluating stability and comparing output of feature selectors that optimize feature subset cardinality. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach Intell 2010;32:1921–39.
[73] Yang F, Mao K. Robust feature selection for microarray data based on multicriterion fusion. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform 2011;8.
[74] Dietterich T. Machine learning research: four current directions. Artif Intell Mag 1997;18:97–136.
[75] Chang C-C, Lin C-J. Libsvm: a library for support vector machines. ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol 2011;2:1–27.
[76] Rifkin R, Klautau A. In defense of one-vs-all classiﬁcation. J Mach Learn Res 2004;5:101–41.
[77] Haykin S. Neural networks: a comprehensive foundation. Prentice Hall; 2008.
[78] Cinar E, Sahin F. A study of recent classiﬁcation algorithms and a novel approach for EEG data classiﬁcation. In: IEEE 2010 international conference on
systems, man and cybernetics; 2010.
[79] Loong AS, Choon OH, Chin LH. Criterion in selecting the clustering algorithm in radial basis functional link nets. WSEAS Trans Syst 2008;7:1290–9.
[80] Marcos JV, Hornero R, Alvarez D. Radial basis function classiﬁers to help in the diagnosis of the obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome from nocturnal
oximetry. Med Biol Eng Comput 2008;46:323–32.
[81] Hongyang L, He J. The application of dynamic k-means clustering algorithm in the center selection of rbf neural networks. In: Proc 3rd international
conference on genetic and evolutionary computing, vol. 177; 2009. p. 488–91.
[82] http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/.
[83] Chandrashekar G, Sahin F. In-vivo fault prediction for rf generators using variable elimination and state-of-theart classiﬁers. 2012 IEEE international
conference on systems, man, and cybernetics October 14–17, COEX, Seoul, Korea; 2012.
Girish Chandrashekar received his B.E. degree in Electronics and Communication from M.S. Ramaiah Institute of Technology in 2009 and M.S. degree in
Electrical Engineering from Rochester Institute of Technology in 2013. His research interests include Robotics, Image Processing and Machine Learning.
Ferat Sahin received his M.Sc. and Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University in 1997 and 2000, respectively. He
joined Rochester Institute of Technology in 2000, where he works as an associate professor. He is also the director of Multi Agent Bio-Robotics Laboratory.
His current ﬁelds of interests are System of Systems, Swarm Intelligence, Robotics, Distributed Computing, and Structural Bayesian Network Learning.
28
G. Chandrashekar, F. Sahin / Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 (2014) 16–28
