--- Page 1 ---
Orrell, David
Article
Commentary on "Addressing the Malaise in neoclassical
economics: A call for partial Models"
Economic Thought
Provided in Cooperation with:
World Economics Association, Bristol
Suggested Citation: Orrell, David (2019) : Commentary on "Addressing the Malaise in neoclassical
economics: A call for partial Models", Economic Thought, ISSN 2049-3509, World Economics
Association, Bristol, Vol. 8, Iss. 1, pp. 53-55
This Version is available at:
https://hdl.handle.net/10419/315819
Standard-Nutzungsbedingungen:
Die Dokumente auf EconStor dürfen zu eigenen wissenschaftlichen
Zwecken und zum Privatgebrauch gespeichert und kopiert werden.
Sie dürfen die Dokumente nicht für öffentliche oder kommerzielle
Zwecke vervielfältigen, öffentlich ausstellen, öffentlich zugänglich
machen, vertreiben oder anderweitig nutzen.
Sofern die Verfasser die Dokumente unter Open-Content-Lizenzen
(insbesondere CC-Lizenzen) zur Verfügung gestellt haben sollten,
gelten abweichend von diesen Nutzungsbedingungen die in der dort
genannten Lizenz gewährten Nutzungsrechte.
Terms of use:
Documents in EconStor may be saved and copied for your personal
and scholarly purposes.
You are not to copy documents for public or commercial purposes, to
exhibit the documents publicly, to make them publicly available on the
internet, or to distribute or otherwise use the documents in public.
If the documents have been made available under an Open Content
Licence (especially Creative Commons Licences), you may exercise
further usage rights as specified in the indicated licence.
  https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/


--- Page 2 ---
Economic Thought 8.1: 53-55, 2019 
 
53 
 
Commentary on ‘Addressing the Malaise in 
Neoclassical Economics: A Call for Partial Models’ 
 
David Orrell, Systems Forecasting, Toronto, Canada  
dorrell@systemsforecasting.com  
 
 
The article by Ron Wallace ‘proposes the deployment of partial modelling, utilising Boolean 
networks (BNs), as an inductive discovery procedure for the development of economic 
theory’. The central argument in favour of partial models is well-made, and while I agree with 
this aspect of the paper, and the conclusion that models should serve as ‘cognitive 
instruments in a regime of exploration,’ I have a number of comments about the proposed 
strategy and the example of BNs.  
The paper states that a theory ‘should be tested for its ability to predict an actual 
economy,’ and notes that BNs have been applied to areas including systems biology, 
‘frequently yielding results with high predictive power’. The implication is that a technique 
which is predictive in systems biology may also be useful for predicting the economy. 
However (speaking as someone who works in the area), in systems biology the word ‘predict’ 
tends to be used rather loosely. It often just means that a result which is already known 
and/or non-surprising can be reproduced, which is not the same as the usual meaning (e.g. 
predicting a financial crisis). A typical usage for example is the title of the paper ‘Boolean 
Network Model Predicts Cell Cycle Sequence of Fission Yeast’. And when researchers refer 
to ‘testing against empirical data to assess predictive power’ (as in the response to a 
comment from Steve Keen on the Economic Thought Open Peer Discussion forum), this 
usually means calibration, unless it is done in a blind-tested fashion, which is extremely rare. 
This is an important distinction for this paper, because a sufficiently complicated model is very 
flexible and can be made to match known data, but may be poor at making non-trivial 
predictions (examples are given below). The article notes that ‘BNs are remarkably flexible’, 
which is not necessarily a good thing.  
The article describes a method whereby BNs can be combined together to form a 
larger model; however this relies on ‘simplification of the partial models to avoid an intractable 
result when they are combined’, such as ‘excluding node values that will produce multiple 
steady states. In addition, feedback loops are excluded because they can frequently yield 
oscillations.’ An advantage of the strategy is ‘the ability of BNs to include system components 
(e.g. cultural or religious variables) for which quantitative data are minimal or lacking, without 
significant loss of predictive power’. Furthermore ‘it is possible to convert a BN into a 
continuous dynamical system configured as ordinary differential equations (ODEs)’. 
The idea is therefore to patch together simple models to create a larger and more 
sophisticated model, while pruning features which create problems, and adding new nodes for 
missing information. However it should be noted that, if models are viewed as patches, it 
need not follow that combining the patches will give a better result, or that simply adding a 
node to a network is enough to account for missing information or dynamics.  
To give a few examples from different contexts: in a model of gene regulation  in 
yeast (Ramsey et al., 2006), it turned out that the main (experimentally verified) prediction 
concerned stochastic effects that were invisible to any ODE model, no matter how many 
equations or parameters were added. Predictive (and blind-tested) models used by drug 
companies to optimise cancer treatments rely on the careful modelling of dynamical cell 


--- Page 3 ---
Economic Thought 8.1: 53-55, 2019 
 
54 
 
population effects of the sort that cannot be captured by either BNs or ODEs, so instead a 
combined ODE/agent-based approach is used (https://www.physiomics-plc.com/technology/), 
which nonetheless limits parameters to things that can be measured or estimated 
experimentally. A simple model, based on just a few parameters, outperformed large-scale 
biophysical ‘gold standard’ cardiac models, containing hundreds of parameters, at predicting 
the cardiac toxicity of drug compounds (Mistry, 2018). In cognitive science, quantum decision 
theory shows that decisions are inconsistent with classical probability: interference effects 
need not more detail, but a different kind of probability (Yukalov and Sornette, 2015). In 
economics, as Bezemer (2012) notes, the money system ‘is alien to the (DS)GE models 
structure and trying to introduce it undermines key model properties’. It isn’t therefore enough 
to add a ‘finance node’ to a model (general equilibrium or other). In all these cases, the 
proposed strategy would fail, because extending the model doesn’t address the problem, 
which is not model size or complexity (in fact small is often better), but model structure (which 
is never perfect because a complex system doesn’t reduce to equations) and the difficulty of 
identifying parameter values. 
More generally, as these examples also illustrate, the strategy does not address the 
main practical limitations of modelling complex living systems, from a cell to an economy. The 
first is that as further detail is added to a model (e.g. extra nodes or equations), the number of 
unknown parameters increases, as does uncertainty about model structure, resulting in 
‘sloppy parameters’ which cannot be determined from data (Gutenkunst et al., 2007). Second, 
such systems are also characterised by opposing positive and negative feedback loops 
(which the paper notes are sometimes omitted during model integration because they are 
destabilising). These are extremely hard to tease out from data because they are usually 
hidden (being often in a state of tension, they seem to cancel out), and also lead to complex 
unstable behaviour. Instability is of course not a problem in itself, since natural systems also 
exploit dynamic instability in order to produce rapid change, but in a model it means that a 
small change in parameters can give a very different result (Orrell, 2007, p. 266), and 
attempts to dampen the instability may just make the model less realistic. 
What the cited paper (Schlatter et al., 2012) calls ‘the final goal of a comprehensive 
dynamic model’ may therefore remain elusive in systems biology as in other fields, despite its 
enduring popularity. (General equilibrium models were born out of neoclassical economists’ 
intention to build such a ‘comprehensive dynamic model’ of the economy, though the 
dynamics were of the equilibrium sort.) However the problem is not the size or scope of the 
system being modelled, but its complexity – modelling a single cell is as hard as modelling the 
climate system. 
One result of these limitations is that, paradoxically, simple models usually give the 
best predictive results (Makridakis and Hibon, 2000), but at the same time never give a 
complete picture. I therefore agree completely that models should be viewed as partial 
approximations and I found the discussion of this very interesting. It is also certainly the case 
that economics can learn much from systems biology, which uses a variety of models 
including ODEs, stochastic models, agent-based models, machine learning, BNs, and so on. 
However the argument of the paper points towards the goal of a comprehensive model (even 
if it is only for a segment of the economy such as HFT), patched together using semi-
automatic techniques; and it isn’t clear how this strategy (joining and extending models while 
pruning features) can address the main problems with economics models, which is that: (a) all 
the difficult features – such as feedback loops, human behaviour, money, and so on – have 
already been pruned out to avoid conflicts or an ‘intractable result’; and (b) there are already 
too many ‘sloppy parameters’ that can’t be determined from data (Romer, 2016). 


--- Page 4 ---
Economic Thought 8.1: 53-55, 2019 
 
55 
 
In light of the structural and predictive limitations of models, I have argued for a 
different dashboard approach, which uses a range of model types (as in systems biology), but 
keeps them mostly separate, on the understanding that none are correct but each captures 
some complementary aspect of the underlying reality (see Orrell, 2018, p. 254; Orrell, 2017, 
p. 21-22). Model size should be limited in order to avoid the above-mentioned problems 
associated with dimensionality. So instead of seeing a BN (or other) as a partial model on 
which to add another model in order to form a larger (and less partial?) model, one treats any 
model as a partial model to be complemented by different models or approaches. 
Finally, one should consider the role of incentives. In an area such as systems 
biology, which is relatively unconstrained by the need to make blind-tested predictions, there 
is a tendency to build ever-larger models of the sort critiqued in Mistry (2018). For something 
like ‘theoretical controversies related to high-frequency trading’ on the other hand, where, 
unlike in systems biology the debate over regulation is a matter of considerable interest to the 
financial sector, there are extremely powerful incentives at work which shape both underlying 
assumptions and the kinds of questions which are asked (Wilmott and Orrell, 2017, p. 194). I 
think a first step before combining models would be to investigate influences such as the 
source of funds for the various modelling approaches. 
 
 
References 
 
Bezemer D.F. (2012) ‘Finance and Growth: When Credit Helps, and When it Hinders.’ 
https://www.ineteconomics.org/uploads/papers/bezemer-dirk-berlin-paper.pdf  
Davidich M.I., Bornholdt S. (2008) ‘Boolean Network Model Predicts Cell Cycle Sequence of 
Fission Yeast.’ PLoS ONE 3(2), e1672. 
Gutenkunst R.N., Waterfall J.J., Casey F.P., Brown K.S., Myers C.R., Sethna J.P. (2007) 
‘Universally Sloppy Parameter Sensitivities in Systems Biology Models.’ PLoS Computational 
Biology 3(10), e189. 
Makridakis S. and Hibon M. (2000) ‘The M3-Competition: results, conclusions and 
implications.’ International Journal of Forecasting, 16, pp. 451–76. 
Mistry H.B. (2018) ‘Complex versus simple models: ion-channel cardiac toxicity prediction.’ 
PeerJ, 6, e4352. 
Orrell D. (2007) The Future of Everything: The Science of Prediction. New York: Basic Books. 
Orrell D. (2017) ‘A Quantum Theory of Money and Value, Part 2: The Uncertainty Principle.’ 
Economic Thought, 6 (2), pp. 14-26. 
Orrell D. (2018) Quantum Economics: The New Science of Money. London: Icon. 
Ramsey S.A., Smith J.J., Orrell D., Marelli M., Petersen T.W., de Atauri P., Bolouri H., 
Aitchison J.D. (2006) ‘Dual feedback loops in the GAL regulon suppress cellular 
heterogeneity in yeast.’ Nature Genetics, 38 (9), p. 1082. 
Romer P. (2016) ‘The Trouble with Macroeconomics.’ Available at https://paulromer.net/wp-
content/uploads/2016/09/WP-Trouble.pdf.   
Wilmott P., Orrell D. (2017) The Money Formula: Dodgy Finance, Pseudo Science, and How 
Mathematicians Took Over the Markets. Chichester: Wiley. 
Yukalov V.I., Sornette D. (2015) ‘Preference reversal in quantum decision theory.’ Frontiers in 
Psychology, 6, pp. 1–7. 
______________________________  
SUGGESTED CITATION: 
Orrell, D. (2019) ‘Commentary on “Addressing the Malaise in Neoclassical Economics: A Call for Partial Models”.’ 
Economic Thought, 8.1, pp. 53-55. http://www.worldeconomicsassociation.org/files/journals/economicthought/WEA-
ET-8-1-Orrell.pdf 
