--- Page 1 ---
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STATE-LEVEL ECONOMIC POLICY UNCERTAINTY
Scott R. Baker
Steven J. Davis
Jeffrey A. Levy
Working Paper 29714
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29714
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH 
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2022, Revised August 2022
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the U.S. National Science Foundation [SES 
1324257]. Our monthly state-level Economic Policy Uncertainty indexes are freely available and 
updated at https://policyuncertainty.com/state_epu.html. We thank the editor and an anonymous 
referee for helpful comments on a previous draft. The views expressed herein are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Scott R. Baker, Steven J. Davis, and Jeffrey A. Levy. All rights reserved. Short 
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission 
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.


--- Page 2 ---
State-Level Economic Policy Uncertainty
Scott R. Baker, Steven J. Davis, and Jeffrey A. Levy 
NBER Working Paper No. 29714
February 2022, Revised August 2022
JEL No. D80,E32,E66,G18,H70,R50
ABSTRACT
We quantify and study state-level economic policy uncertainty. Tapping digital archives for 
nearly 3,500 local newspapers, we construct three monthly indexes for each state: one that 
captures state and local sources of policy uncertainty (EPU-S), one that captures national and 
international sources (EPU-N), and a composite index that captures both. EPU-S rises around 
gubernatorial elections and own-state episodes like the California electricity crisis of 2000-01 and 
the Kansas tax experiment of 2012. EPU-N rises around presidential elections and in response to 
9-11, Gulf Wars I and II, the 2011 debt-ceiling crisis, the 2012 fiscal cliff episode, and federal 
government shutdowns. Close elections elevate policy uncertainty much more than the average 
election. VAR models fit to pre-COVID data imply that upward shocks to own-state EPU 
foreshadow weaker economic performance in the state, as do upward EPU shocks in contiguous 
states. The COVID-19 pandemic drove huge increases in policy uncertainty and unemployment, 
more so in states with stricter government-mandated lockdowns.
Scott R. Baker
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
s-baker@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Steven J. Davis
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu
Jeffrey A. Levy
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
1307 E 60th St
Office 3101
Chicago, IL 60637
United States
levyjeff@uchicago.edu
A State-level economic policy measures is available at https://policyuncertainty.com/state_epu.html
A replication package is available at https://stevenjdavis.com/s/State-EPU-Replication-Package.zip


--- Page 3 ---
1
Introduction
Policy uncertainty and its economic consequences are salient concerns in the United States and
around the world. High uncertainty can depress economic activity by causing ﬁrms to defer in-
vestments that are costly to undo, by raising credit spreads and risk premiums (thereby dampening
business investment and hiring), and by prompting consumers to postpone purchases of durable
goods.1 Several studies provide evidence that uncertainty increases around political elections and
that election-related uncertainty has material effects on corporate investment, capital ﬂows, pre-
cautionary savings, and stock price volatility.2 Baker et al. (2014) document an upward drift in
U.S. policy uncertainty since the 1960s that broadly coincides with rising political polarization
and growth in government spending, taxes, and regulations.
Previous research focuses on national measures of policy uncertainty and national outcomes,
as in Alexopoulos and Cohen (2015), Baker et al. (2016), Davis (2016), Ozturk and Sheng (2018),
and Ahir et al. (2018). Uncertainty related to sub-national policy also matters for business and
household decision-making. State and local governments differ greatly in the design of their tax
systems and their choice of tax rates. Their spending amounts to almost 15 percent of U.S. GDP
(Nunn et al., 2019). They also determine land-use policies, business and occupational licensing
rules, education standards, minimum wages, unemployment beneﬁts, eligibility rules for social
programs, environmental regulations, health and safety regulations, and more. Indeed, Justice
Louis Brandeis famously characterized the states as ‘laboratories of democracy.’3
Whether experimentation per se is the intent, the power to set policies and change them is
a source of economic uncertainty. States also differ in industry mix, energy sources, population
1See, for example, Bernanke (1983) and McDonald and Siegel (1986) on the value of waiting to invest when
uncertainty is unusually high; Christiano et al. (2014), Gilchrist et al. (2014) and Arellano et al. (2019) on uncertainty
effects that work through credit spreads and risk premiums; and Eberly (1994) on how uncertainty affects consumer
expenditures on durable goods. Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2015) show how ﬁscal policy uncertainty depresses output
in a New Keynesian model by intensifying monopoly pricing distortions. Bloom (2014) reviews the larger literature.
Pástor and Veronesi (2013) and Arbatli et al. (2022) consider the two-way interplay between policy uncertainty and
economic performance.
2See Canes-Wrone and Park (2012), Julio and Yook (2012, 2016), Giavazzi and McMahon (2012), Kelly et al.
(2016), Hassan et al. (2019) and Baker et al. (2020), among others. Many other studies investigate the economic
effects of policy uncertainty more generally. See, for example, Baker et al. (2016) and Gulen and Ion (2016).
3New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285 U.S. 262 (1932).
1


--- Page 4 ---
characteristics, and the economic footprint of the federal government. As a consequence, states
are differently exposed to federal tax policy, defense spending, energy prices, and other economic
developments inﬂuenced by federal policy.4 As an example, national policy efforts to promote a
shift from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources have profoundly uneven effects across the ﬁfty
states. As another example, hikes in the federal minimum wage may matter little in high-wage
states while materially raising the cost of low-wage labor in other states.
In light of these remarks, we utilize the digital archives of nearly 3,500 local newspapers to
construct three monthly indexes of economic policy uncertainty for each state: one that captures
state and local sources of policy uncertainty (EPU-S), another that captures national and inter-
national sources (EPU-N), and a composite index (EPU-C) that captures both state + local and
national + international sources. Half the articles that feed into our composite indexes discuss state
and local policy, conﬁrming that sub-national matters are major sources of policy uncertainty.
Our EPU measures exhibit enormous increases in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, in line
with evidence for a wide range of other uncertainty indicators in Altig et al. (2020). Looking over
our full sample (which for a dozen states extends back to 1985), EPU-S rises around presidential
and own-state gubernatorial elections and in response to own-state episodes such as the California
electricity crisis of 2000-01 and the Kansas tax experiment of 2012. EPU-N rises around pres-
idential elections and in response to the 9-11 terrorist attacks, the July 2011 debt-ceiling crisis,
federal government shutdowns, and other "national" events. Close elections (winning vote mar-
gin under 4 percent) elevate policy uncertainty much more than less competitive elections. Using
statistical models that include controls for common trends, seasonal effects, and state-level eco-
nomic conditions, a close presidential election contest raises EPU-N by 60 percent and a close
gubernatorial contest raises EPU-S by 35 percent.
More broadly, the relative importance of state and national sources of policy uncertainty differs
greatly across states and over time. As a simple metric, consider the ratio of EPU-S to EPU-N
for a given state. The time-averaged value of this ratio ranges from 0.35 in the District of Columbia
4For evidence, see Davis et al. (1997), Albuoy (2009), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2014). Mumtaz et al. (2018)
provide evidence that national uncertainty shocks have heterogeneous effects across the states.
2


--- Page 5 ---
to 1.51 in Alaska. The cross-state average value rose from 0.65 in the pre-pandemic years to
1.1 in the period from March 2020 to June 2021. Since the timing, stringency, and duration of
gathering restrictions, school closure orders, business closure orders, and shelter-in-place orders
during the pandemic were largely set by state and local authorities, it makes sense that EPU-S
saw an especially large increase after February 2020.5
Our state-level measures make it feasible to leverage sub-national variation when studying
policy uncertainty and its effects, while also controlling for local institutions and economic con-
ditions.6 We provide the ﬁrst evidence on the relative importance of state and national sources of
state-level policy uncertainty, how these sources differ across states, and how they vary over time
within states. By exploiting the richness of our state-level data, we show that closer elections for
political leaders bring greater policy uncertainty. We also show, in several ways, that state-level
policy uncertainty matters for state-level economic performance. Using VAR models, we ﬁnd that
upward innovations in own-state EPU-C foreshadow higher unemployment, lower employment,
and weaker housing markets. Extending the VAR models to allow for spatial spillovers, we also
provide the ﬁrst evidence that upward policy uncertainty shocks in neighboring states negatively
affect own-state activity.7 And we develop the ﬁrst evidence on how government-mandated lock-
downs during the pandemic impacted policy uncertainty differently across the 50 states.
Four other studies feature sub-national measures of policy uncertainty. Shoag and Veuger
(2016) examine state-level indicators of policy uncertainty in the Great Recession. Their measures
lack a time-series dimension. Rauh (2019) develops text-based uncertainty indicators for Cana-
dian provinces and territories. In concurrent work, Elkamhi et al. (2021) also use newspapers to
construct state-level EPU measures. We differ from their work in building indexes that separately
quantify national and state sources of state-level policy uncertainty. Like Elkamhi et al. (2021), we
ﬁnd a great deal of state-speciﬁc time variation in policy uncertainty. And like them, we ﬁnd that
5See Arnon et al. (2020), Coibion et al. (2020) and Goolsbee et al. (2020) on the prevalence of restrictive orders
issued by state and local governments during the pandemic.
6Our data are freely available at www.policyuncertainty.com/state_epu.html. We update our state-level EPU mea-
sures on a regular basis, following our customary practice for the national EPU measures featured on the same site.
7This aspect of our results complements work on the spillover of national (policy) uncertainty shocks across coun-
tries. See, for example, Colombo (2013), Klössner and Sekkel (2014), Bhattarai et al. (2020), and Arbatli et al. (2022).
3


--- Page 6 ---
upward shocks in state-level EPU foreshadow weaker economic performance in the state. Their
measures end in 2019, before the COVID-19 pandemic and the huge increases in policy uncer-
tainty that came with it. Finally, Ash et al. (2020) consider state-level EPU – as measured by the
frequency of “economic policy uncertainty” in local newspapers – to test one implication of their
incomplete-contracts theory of legislative detail.
The next section explains how we construct our state-level indexes and summarizes their be-
havior. Section 3 explores several drivers of state-level EPU, with particular attention to election-
related uncertainty and a variety of state, national, and international episodes that involve high
levels of policy uncertainty. In Section 4, we use pre-COVID data to estimate panel VAR models
that relate state-level economic activity to state-level EPU. We apply the models to characterize
the dynamic response of state-level activity to own-state and border-state EPU shocks, with spe-
cial attention to California in view of its size, policy-induced electricity crisis in 2000-01, and
gubernatorial recall in 2003. Section 5 focuses on developments during the pandemic. We ﬁnd
that states with stricter lockdowns had bigger rises in policy uncertainty relative to 2019, bigger
rises in unemployment, and bigger falls in employment – all conditional on pandemic severity, as
measured by COVID deaths per capita. Section 6 offers concluding remarks.
2
State-level Economic Policy Uncertainty Indexes
To measure state-level economic policy uncertainty (EPU), we turn to local newspapers in
each state and track the fraction of articles that discuss policy-related economic uncertainty. We
follow the approach of Baker et al. (2016) in constructing our measures but develop an extensive
collection of new term sets to disentangle state and local from national (and international) sources
of policy uncertainty.
2.1
Why Newspapers?
Newspapers have many attractive attributes for our purposes. They publish frequently, facili-
tating the creation of monthly, weekly and even daily measures. Their timely character allows for
the production of forward-looking uncertainty indicators in real time, which is especially valuable
4


--- Page 7 ---
amidst novel developments like the COVID-19 pandemic (Altig et al., 2020). Digital newspaper
archives often extend back for decades, letting us create panel data with a long time-series di-
mension. Newspaper coverage of a particular topic expands and contracts as concerns and news
ﬂow related to the topic wax and wane. Moreover, the richness of newspaper text lets us drill
into the forces that drive uncertainty in response to particular state, national and international de-
velopments. By using multiple newspapers in a given state and month, we average out much of
the idiosyncratic noise present in the coverage of a single newspaper, and we reduce biases that
might arise from slanted coverage in particular papers. Finally, newspapers offer one of the few
sources for creating sub-national uncertainty measures on a frequent and timely basis. In con-
trast, uncertainty proxies based on option prices or ﬁnancial market volatility are difﬁcult to create
for sub-national units. And survey data typically lack the combination of spatial granularity, fre-
quency, and topical density that is easily achieved with newspapers.
2.2
Tracking Newspapers
To construct our EPU measures, we draw on the digital archives provided by the Access World
News Newsbank service. We include daily and weekly newspapers, ranging from small, local
papers to ﬂagship newspapers that circulate throughout the state. We exclude papers with a strong
national reach like the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal. Our sample runs from January
1985 onward, is shorter for many states, and covers all states since 2006. All told, we use about
3,500 newspapers, and the median number of papers per state-month observation is 49.
The average coverage duration for the newspapers in our sample is about 14 years. Once
included, coverage usually extends through the present day, although about 250 papers disappear
from the archives by 2010. These sample exits typically occur because the paper ceased operations
or was absorbed by a competitor (who is often in our sample). Papers that disappear from the
sample tend to have smaller circulation and lower article counts. There are no instances in which
the state’s largest newspaper exits the sample. Appendix Table A.2 provides additional statistics
on newspaper counts, circulation, and sample start dates by state.
5


--- Page 8 ---
2.3
Using Term Sets to Flag Relevant Newspaper Articles
We ﬂag newspaper articles that contain at least one of ‘economic’ or ‘economy’ (E); and at
least one of ‘uncertain’, ‘uncertainties’, or ‘uncertainty’ (U); and at least one term in a policy set
that differs between EPU-N and EPU-S to reﬂect their different objectives. In devising the
policy sets for EPU-N and EPU-S, we avoid terms like ‘taxes’ and ‘tax policy’ that refer to
shared responsibilities among federal, state, and local governments.8
The policy term set for EPU-N mainly contains terms for national policy-making institutions
and regulatory agencies but also includes ‘monetary policy’ and terms that refer to the election of
federal ofﬁcials. See Appendix Table A.1. For EPU-S, we tailor the policy sets to cover relevant
state and local ofﬁcials, policy-making bodies, and regulatory agencies. Thus, our state-speciﬁc
policy sets include terms like ‘governor’, ‘mayor’, ‘state senate’, ‘city council’, and the like. To
assemble these terms, we consulted government websites for the titles of ofﬁcials and names of
legislatures and state bodies with authority over regulations pertaining to the environment, labor
and unemployment, gambling, transportation, energy and utilities, banking, and other ﬁnancial
services. We include ‘zoning’ in our EPU-S policy sets, because zoning functions as an important
policy lever that is exercised mainly by state and local governments. We also include ‘referendum’
for states that have provisions for putting direct votes on policy matters before their citizens.9 For
comparison, Table A.1 also reports the “BBD” policy term set developed by Baker et al. (2016).
8We investigated whether the inclusion of tax-related terms improve our EPU-N and EPU-S indexes. Not sur-
prisingly, tax-related terms are unhelpful in distinguishing between articles about national sources of policy uncertainty
and articles about state and local sources. Moreover, conditional on our other policy terms, the inclusion of tax-related
terms ﬂags few articles about policy uncertainty that we otherwise miss. On the margin, tax-related terms yield a low
ratio of true positives to false positives in ﬂagging articles. Baker et al. (2016) reached the same conclusion, based on
a large-scale human audit study, regarding the potential use of tax-related terms in their national EPU index.
9Table A.1 reports our policy set for Michigan. The full collection of state-speciﬁc policy term sets is available on
the Economic Policy Uncertainty website at https://policyuncertainty.com/state_epu_terms.html.
6


--- Page 9 ---
2.4
EPU Index Construction
Having ﬂagged a suitable set of articles, we compute the raw state-level indexes by calculating
Raw EPU-Ns,t = (# of Articles with E, U and National Policy Terms)s,t
(Total # of Articles in Same Newspapers)s,t
,
(1)
Raw EPU-Ss,t = (# of Articles with E, U and Own-State Policy Terms)s,t
(Total # of Articles in Same Newspapers)s,t
,
and
(2)
Raw EPU-Cs,t = (# of Articles with E, U and (Own-State or National Policy Terms))s,t
(Total # of Articles in Same Newspapers)s,t
, (3)
where s and t index the state and monthly time period, respectively. To obtain our ﬁnal indexes,
we divide each raw index value by the average of Raw EPU-N from 2006 to 2019 for the state
in question and multiply by 100. This normalization preserves information about the relative
magnitudes of EPU-N, EPU-S and EPU-C within each state.10 We take the same approach in
calculating our EPU-BBD measures for each state.
2.5
A First Look at the Sources of State-Level Policy Uncertainty
Figure 1 displays a quarterly series for the equal-weighted average value of EPU-C and its
three-way decomposition by source of policy uncertainty. Our decomposition reﬂects the content
of articles the feed into the EPU-C indexes – speciﬁcally, whether they discuss only national (and
international) policy matters, only state and local policy matters, or both. From 1985 to February
2020, articles that discuss only national policy matters account for 50% of the average EPU-C
value. Articles that discuss only state and local policy matters account for 30%, and those that
discuss both account for 20%. From March 2020 to June 2021, the shares are 38% for national
only, 40% for state and local only, and 22% for articles that discuss both. These results establish
the importance of state and local policy matters as sources of state-level policy uncertainty.
The sources of EPU also vary greatly across states. At the extremes, articles that mention only
10Our normalization method equalizes the level of EPU-Ns,t across states over the normalization period. We
make this choice deliberately based on our sense that cross-state variation in average levels is heavily inﬂuenced by
differences in newspaper practices across states, e.g., the share of newspaper articles devoted to sports or weather.
7


--- Page 10 ---
state and local policy matters account for 45% of EPU-C in Alaska from 1985 to 2021 but only
18% in South Dakota and 10% in Washington, DC. Articles that mention only national and inter-
national policy matters account for 75% of EPU-C in Washington, DC and 62% in Pennsylvania
but only 26% in Wyoming and Alaska. We offer many examples of shocks and developments that
drive common and state-speciﬁc movements in our EPU measures in the analysis below.
2.6
State-Level EPU Behavior over Time and Across States
Figure 2 displays monthly values for the cross-state averages of EPU-N and EPU-S. Gulf
Wars I and II, close presidential elections, ﬁnancial crises, major political conﬂicts over ﬁscal
policy, the June 2016 Brexit referendum, trade policy tensions during the Trump presidency, and
Trump’s impeachment in December 2019 all leave visible marks on the indexes, especially EPU-
N. The pandemic pushed (average) EPU-N to 2.7 times its pre-COVID peak and pushed EPU-S
to more than four times its previous peak. The times-series correlation between the two measures
displayed in Figure 2 is 0.74 from 1985 to 2019 and 0.88 when using data through June 2021.
Even before the pandemic struck, policy uncertainty levels had drifted upward over time: The
average EPU-N value is 114 from 2008 to 2019, as compared to 96 from 1985 to 2007. This
pattern broadly aligns with the newspaper-based evidence in Baker et al. (2016). They also ﬁnd
an upward drift in policy uncertainty measures derived from the periodic Beige Books compiled
by economists in the Federal Reserve System and in descriptions of “Risk Factors” in the annual
10-K ﬁlings of listed ﬁrms. Hassan et al. (2019) ﬁnd an upward drift in political risks facing ﬁrms
based on their analysis of quarterly earnings conference calls. Aside from the COVID episode,
the cross-state average EPU-N measure ﬂuctuates with greater amplitude than average EPU-S,
because many state-level sources of EPU are idiosyncratic and average out in the cross section.
Appendix Figure A.1 plots the average between-state EPU correlations in rolling samples of
the last 60 observations. The 9-11 attacks, the ﬁnancial crisis in September 2008, the onset of the
COVID pandemic, and (to a lesser extent) the November 2016 election victory of Donald Trump
brought abrupt increases in the average pairwise correlations. This illustrates how major political,
geopolitical, and economic developments can drive simultaneous increases in state-level EPU.
8


--- Page 11 ---
Nevertheless, there is much state-speciﬁc time variation in our EPU measures. The average
pairwise time-series correlation between states is only 0.23 for EPU-S and 0.39 for EPU-N for
the period ending in 2019. The ﬁrst principal component accounts for only 26% of the monthly
time-series variation in the state-level EPU-S measures, and the next four components account
for another 27%. Not surprisingly, the EPU-N measures exhibit more commonality: The ﬁrst
principal component accounts for 47% of the state-level variation, and the next four components
account for another 16%.11 There is also much index-speciﬁc variation. Looking within states over
time in the pre-pandemic period, the correlation between EPU-N and EPU-S ranges from 0.17
to 0.76, with a mean of 0.45.
To investigate whether and how co-movements in the state-level EPU measures depend on
spatial proximity, we estimate dyadic regression models of the following form:
Cij = ai + aj + β1B(i, j) + β2Dist(i, j) + ϵij,
(4)
where Cij denotes the pairwise correlation between EPU measures for states i and j over the
longest available time span, ai and aj are ﬁxed effects for states i and j, B(i, j) is an indicator
function that equals 1 when states i and j share a border, and Dist(i, j) is the log distance between i
and j (hundreds of miles). There are 51(50)/2=1,275 pairwise correlations for each EPU measure.
When we ﬁt (4) by least squares to the pairwise EPU-N correlations, we obtain ˆβ1 = 0.001
[0.005] and ˆβ2 = 0.006 [0.011].12 Similarly, ﬁtting (4) to the pairwise EPU-S correlations also
yields small and statistically insigniﬁcant values for ˆβ1 and ˆβ2. Thus, we ﬁnd no evidence that
state-level EPU movements are more similar for states in closer proximity.
There is, however, a geographic structure to state-level EPU co-movements. Speciﬁcally, Fig-
ure A.2 shows how each state-level EPU measure correlates over time with the corresponding
national average EPU value. EPU measures for the Mountain states, Alaska, the Dakotas, Ne-
braska, Kansas, Oklahoma, several Southern states (but not Texas and Florida), Maine, Vermont
and New Hampshire correlate more weakly with national average values than other states. Roughly
11We use a balanced panel of 44 states from January 2001 to July 2021 in the principal components analysis.
12We adjust standard errors for the dyadic structure following Fafchamps and Gubert (2006).
9


--- Page 12 ---
speaking, “hinterland” states exhibit more idiosyncratic EPU variation than other states.
In summary, there is much commonality in measured EPU ﬂuctuations across states and over
time within states, but there is also a great deal of state-speciﬁc and index-speciﬁc variation. This
idiosyncratic variation is quite useful in downstream econometric applications, a fact we exploit
in the rest of the paper. Perhaps surprisingly, we ﬁnd no evidence that states in closer physical
proximity exhibit stronger EPU co-movements.
3
Drivers of State-Level Economic Policy Uncertainty
3.1
Election-Related Uncertainty
Elections are an obvious source of policy uncertainty. Indeed, Baker et al. (2020) ﬁnd that
national EPU indices exhibit a clear tendency to rise in the months leading up to national elections
in a sample of 23 countries around the world. We now investigate whether and how our state-level
EPU measures respond to U.S. presidential and own-state gubernatorial elections.
In Table 1, we regress our monthly state-level EPU indexes on election indicators that equal
one in an election month and the prior month, zero otherwise. Column (1) reports a least-squares
regression of log EPU-Ns,t on these indicators.13 We control for state ﬁxed effects and time-
varying economic conditions, as measured by the state’s contemporaneous unemployment rate
and a summary measure of its coincident economic indicators. On average and conditional on the
controls, EPU-Ns,t is 33 log points higher around presidential elections, with a t-statistic of 13.
Gubernatorial elections also raise EPU-Ns,t, but the effect is much smaller and only marginally
signiﬁcant. When we add common year effects (controlling for any drift over time in the under-
lying level of EPU) and common month effects (controlling for unobserved seasonal forces that
affect EPU in Novembers, for example), the coefﬁcient on the presidential election indicator is
nearly unchanged, but the gubernatorial election indicator becomes smaller and statistically in-
signiﬁcant. We ﬁnd strong statistical evidence that presidential and gubernatorial elections have
13In practice, we use the inverse hyperbolic sine of the state-level EPU measures. The inverse hyperbolic sine
transformation handles zero values while closely approximating the natural log transformation. See Bellemare and
Wichman (2020).
10


--- Page 13 ---
sizable positive effects on EPU-Ss,t in columns (4) and (5). Notably, we ﬁnd substantially higher
effects of gubernatorial elections on EPU-Ss,t relative to EPU-Ns,t.
Close elections (winning margin less than 4 percent) yield especially large increases in our
state-level policy uncertainty measures, as shown in columns (3) and (6). The total estimated
effect of a close presidential election on EPU-Ns,t is 47 log points, or 60 percent. The total effect
of a close, own-state gubernatorial election on EPU-Ss,t is 30 log points, or 35 percent.
The results in Table 1 tell us that elections have powerful effects on state-level policy uncer-
tainty, and that they alter the mix between EPU-N and EPU-S over time. We isolate the mix
effect in Figure 3, which plots the average time path of EPU-S relative to EPU-N in the months
around presidential and gubernatorial elections, conditional on state-level economic conditions and
other controls. Gubernatorial elections raise the ratio of EPU-S relative to EPU-N, with a peak
estimated effect of about 18 log points in the election month. Presidential elections pull down the
ratio of EPU-S relative to EPU-N, with a peak estimated effect of about -31 log points.
3.2
Selected National and International Events
We now investigate how our state-level EPU measures respond to several national and interna-
tional events that created policy uncertainty directly or that raised profound questions about policy
responses: the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon
building on 11 September 2001; the U.S. debt-ceiling crisis in July 2011; the June 2016 Brexit ref-
erendum in the United Kingdom, which reverberated through ﬁnancial markets around the world;
Donald Trump’s election victory in November 2016, the biggest U.S. presidential election surprise
since Harry Truman defeated Thomas Dewey in the 1948 contest; and partial federal government
shutdowns that commenced in October 2013 and December 2018.
Figure 4 displays histograms of one-month log changes, ln(EPU-Ns,t

EPU-Ns,t−1), where
s indexes states as before, and t is the event month. All six events drove increases in EPU-N in
most states, and the increases are often quite large. For example, the November 2016 presidential
election outcome triggered EPU-N increases in 86 percent of states, with a median jump of 80 log
points. Four states (Georgia, Maryland, Maine, and Rhode Island) had EPU-N jumps of 200 log
11


--- Page 14 ---
points or more in reaction to Trump’s election win. The debt-ceiling crisis and the two government
shutdowns drove EPU-N increases in 80 percent or more of states, and the 9-11 attacks raised
EPU-N in all but three states.14 The median EPU-N spike ranges from 45 to 120 log points
across these four episodes. Lastly, in reaction to the surprise Brexit referendum outcome, EPU-N
rose in 84 percent of states, with a median jump of 64 log points. As the Brexit case shows, major
policy developments in other countries can drive large, heterogeneous changes in state-level policy
uncertainty. Figure 2 identiﬁes other foreign developments that drove large increases in EPU-N.
3.3
The California Electricity Crisis of 2000-01
California experienced a spectacular electricity crisis from May 2000 to June 2001 after a
multi-year effort to reform its wholesale and retail markets.15 Wholesale prices rose by a factor
of six from the second half of 1999 to the second half of 2000. Average spot prices for wholesale
power in the ﬁrst few months of 2001 were ten times their levels in 1998 and 1999. Regulators
froze retail electricity prices in the summer of 2000, before letting them rise in early 2001. Even
then, they let retail prices rise much less than wholesale power costs. By January 2001, California’s
two largest utilities were insolvent and had ceased paying their bills for wholesale power. Gov-
ernor Gray Davis declared a state of emergency on January 17th, and the state began purchasing
power directly at very high costs to head off widespread blackouts. Many Californians had already
experienced rolling blackouts and mandatory cutbacks in electricity consumption.
The electricity crisis was a principal factor in the ultimately successfully effort to recall Gov-
ernor Davis. That effort began in early 2003 and gained momentum in May 2003, when U.S.
Representative Darrell Issa announced he would contribute substantial sums to help gather signa-
tures to force a recall election. By July 2003 the recall campaign had gathered enough signatures
to put the question on the ballot. The recall election on October 7 removed Governor Davis and
elected Arnold Schwarzenegger as his successor. This episode remains one of only two successful
gubernatorial recall efforts in U.S. history, the other taking place in North Dakota in 1921.
14Alaska, Maine, and Nevada, where it rose with a 1-2 month delay.
15Our summary of what was a multi-faceted and highly contentious regulatory, political, and economic crisis draws
on Joskow (2001), Wolak (2003), and Bushnell (2004). See those sources for a fuller discussion of the crisis.
12


--- Page 15 ---
California’s electricity crisis and gubernatorial recall are clearly visible in Figure 5, which plots
the quarterly paths of EPU-S and EPU-N for the state from 1996 to 2006. Its EPU-S levels
during the electricity crisis and around the recall campaign and election are more than twice as high
as in the preceding and following years. Its EPU-S index rose much more during this period than
the average of EPU-S index values, as seen by comparing to Figure 2. EPU-N also rose to high
levels from 2000 to 2004, largely because of national and international developments that affected
all states. California-centric aspects of federal policy actions also contributed to the state’s high
EPU-N values in this period. Speciﬁcally, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC)
played a signiﬁcant role in California’s electricity crisis.16
3.4
Other Illustrative Episodes with High State-Level EPU
Figure 6 highlights selected episodes with high levels of EPU in three other states. The chart
for Kansas shows that EPU-S more than doubled in late 2010, when Sam Brownback prevailed in
the state’s gubernatorial election. He ran on a platform that stressed tax reform and, once elected,
followed through. The ‘Kansas Experiment’ to reduce income taxes, enacted in 2012, and the
passage of additional tax cuts in early 2013 are both clearly visible in the state’s EPU-S index.
The chart for Louisiana illustrates a different example. Hurricane Katrina struck the state in
late August 2005, causing widespread destruction of private property and public infrastructure and
a near-total exodus from New Orleans. The devastation wrought by the hurricane also brought
great uncertainty about how local, state, and federal policymakers and ofﬁcials would respond.
Accordingly, Louisiana’s EPU-S and EPU-N series rose dramatically in the wake of Katrina
and, in the case of EPU-S, remained elevated through 2007. As revealed by a glance at Figure 2,
nothing similar happened to the cross-state average values of EPU-S and EPU-N in this period.
16FERC initiated a formal investigation into California’s wholesale electricity markets in August 2000, identiﬁed
“structural reforms that must be addressed” and placed a ceiling on electricity price bids in California’s wholesale
markets in November, and waived rules for generating facilities to increase power supplies in December. Later in
December, FERC took additional steps to regulate pricing and other aspects of California’s wholesale power markets
and to create independent “Governing Boards” to monitor those markets. In March 2001, FERC issued its “ﬁrst
refund order directing sellers to provide refunds of excess amounts charged for certain electric energy sales during
the month of January 2001.” That same month, FERC staff issued a proposal for “monitoring and mitigating prices
prospectively” in California’s wholesale power markets. See the chronology of FERC actions from 2000 to 2002 at
https://www.ferc.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/2020-05/pr-07-26-00.pdf and the links therein.
13


--- Page 16 ---
Indeed, the average EPU series ﬂuctuated around unusually low levels in and around 2005.
Finally, the chart for Michigan considers the period before, during, and after the global ﬁnancial
crisis and Great Recession. National developments ﬁgure prominently in the behavior of EPU-S
and EPU-N for Michigan, partly because the cyclically sensitive auto industry is a major part of
Michigan’s economy. That makes Michigan unusually exposed to policy uncertainty that causes or
responds to national economic ﬂuctuations. For example, the federal government played a major
role in rescuing U.S. automobile manufacturers (and their employees) during the Great Recession.
The economic uncertainty associated with that rescue effort was accentuated for Michigan by
virtue of the state’s industrial structure.
In summary, the examples highlighted by Figures 5 and 6 illustrate that high state-level EPU
can arise in several ways – as a consequence of shocks interacting with bad policy design (Califor-
nia’s electricity crisis) and the resulting political turmoil (gubernatorial recall), policy reforms
designed to lower taxes and promote growth (the Kansas tax experiment), devastating natural
disasters that raise policy issues about whether and how a state will rebuild (Katrina), and state
economies that are unusually exposed to national developments and sources of policy uncertainty
by virtue of their industrial structure (Michigan in the Great Recession).
3.5
The Main Locus of Policy Uncertainty Shifted after the Pandemic
Recall from Figures 2 and 1 that our state-level policy uncertainty measures rose enormously in
the wake of the pandemic. What’s easy to overlook in these ﬁgures is the simultaneous shift in the
predominant source of policy uncertainty. Figure 7 highlights this shift, showing that the ratio of
EPU-S to EPU-N rose in all but a few states after the pandemic. The ratio rose by a factor of two
or more in Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Tennessee,
Texas and Utah, while falling slightly in Delaware, Maine, Mississippi, New Hampshire, Rhode
Island, and South Dakota. The cross-state average value of this ratio rose from 0.65 in the pre-
pandemic part of our sample to 1.1 in the period from March 2020 to June 2021.
It is perhaps no surprise that the locus of policy uncertainty shifted to state and local policy
matters after the pandemic struck. State and local authorities largely determined the parameters of
14


--- Page 17 ---
government-mandated restrictions on economic and social activity during the pandemic. The scale
of the shift is remarkable nonetheless. It constitutes a major break in the sources of policy-related
uncertainty within the federal system of American government. Whether, and how fully, this shift
will persist remains to be seen.
4
State-level EPU and Economic Performance
This section investigates how economic activity responds to state-level policy uncertainty shocks
in vector autoregressive (VAR) models. The results yield clear evidence that upward own-state pol-
icy uncertainty shocks foreshadow weaker activity in the state, and in contiguous states. As we
illustrate for California, states sometimes experience a sequence of EPU shocks that drive – or at
least foreshadow – material movements in the state-level unemployment rate.
4.1
Panel VAR Analysis
We ﬁt a panel VAR to monthly, state-level data on ln(EPU-C) and economic activity. We use
the composite EPU measure here, because we aim to capture all relevant sources of policy uncer-
tainty for the state – whether due to local, state, national or international developments. For now,
our activity measure is either the state’s unemployment rate or the natural log of its employment
multiplied by 100. Unless noted otherwise, all speciﬁcations include state-speciﬁc intercept terms
and six lags of state-level activity and ln(EPU-C) in each equation. To identify shocks, we use
a Cholesky decomposition with ln(EPU-C) placed ﬁrst in the recursive causal ordering. We also
consider results when placing ln(EPU-C) last in the causal ordering. Appendix A.3 sets forth an
explicit statement of our structural VAR and its identiﬁcation.
We estimate the VAR by least squares, using data for 44 states from January 2001 to December
2019. Starting in January 2001 maximizes the number of state-month observations in a balanced
panel design.17 We stop in December 2019 in view of the economy’s highly atypical dynamic
response to the COVID shock and attendant uncertainty: the lag between the COVID shock and
17The omitted states are Arkansas, Delaware, Hawaii, New Mexico, South Dakota, West Virginia, and Wyoming.
While we have EPU data for New Mexico and West Virginia from 1996, the sample of newspapers (and articles) for
these states is thin and variable, resulting in very noisy EPU series.
15


--- Page 18 ---
the trough was extraordinarily short, the recession was extremely short-lived, and the early pace
of recovery was unusually rapid.18 Thus, it makes little sense to include the COVID episode when
seeking to characterize the normal dynamic relationship of EPU to economic activity.
Figure 8 displays estimated dynamic responses to unit standard deviation ln(EPU-C) shocks,
along with 95% conﬁdence intervals. Our preferred speciﬁcation uses the ﬁlter proposed by Hamil-
ton (2018) with his recommended look-back horizon (h = 24) and one year of lags (p = 12). We
also report results using the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) ﬁlter with λ = 129, 600, and using unﬁltered
data.19 Since we lose six observations for lags, our estimation sample runs from July 2001 to De-
cember 2019 for VARs ﬁt to raw data or to HP-ﬁltered data. The Hamilton ﬁlter uses an extra 35
observations, yielding an estimation sample that runs from June 2004 to December 2019.
As the ﬁgure shows, own-state policy uncertainty shocks foreshadow lower employment and
higher unemployment in the state, with hump-shaped dynamic responses that peak after about one
year. The EPU shock responses are modest in size but estimated with good precision, owing to
the richness of our state-level data. Using the Hamilton ﬁlter, the unemployment rate response to
a unit standard deviation upward innovation in ln(EPU-C) peaks 11 to 14 months later at 0.103
percentage points, with a 95% conﬁdence interval of 0.05 to 0.15 points. The peak employment
response is -0.131 log points after about one year. HP-ﬁltered data yield similar results. Unﬁltered
data also yield similar results, except the impulse responses are more persistent.
The dynamic response to a ln(EPU-C) shock in Figure 8 is qualitatively similar to what Baker
et al. (2016) ﬁnd in a 12-country panel VAR but smaller in magnitude. They estimate a peak
unemployment rate response of 0.25 percentage points one year after a 90-point shock to the level
of EPU, which amounts to 65 log points on an EPU base of 100.20 Scaling up to account for
18U.S. and global stock markets fell about 40% from 17 February to 23 March 2020 in reaction to the esca-
lating COVID-19 pandemic, and economic activity underwent a spectacular collapse by mid-April (Davis et al.
(2021)).
According to the NBER Business Cycle Dating Committee, the COVID recession lasted only two
months, making it the shortest on record back to 1854. See the Committee’s announcement on 19 July 2021 at
www.nber.org/research/business-cycle-dating.
19Hamilton (2018) argues that the HP ﬁlter produces spurious dynamic relations, and that standard choices of λ,
which are almost universally drawn from Hodrick and Prescott’s original work, are not justiﬁed by the data. Despite
Hamilton’s criticisms, the HP ﬁlter remains in widespread use, so we report results for both ﬁlters. As it turns out, the
two ﬁltering approaches yield similar results in our setting.
20Baker et al. (2016) normalize each country’s mean EPU level to 100, but the country-speciﬁc normalization period
16


--- Page 19 ---
the larger EPU shock in their study, our panel VAR yields a peak unemployment response of
(0.65/0.45)(0.103) = 0.15 percentage points. Thus, our peak unemployment rate response to a
same-size EPU shock is only 60 percent as large as theirs. One possible reason is that state-level
data are nosier than national data, leading to more attenuation of estimated effects in our setting.
Especially for less populous states, monthly activity measures are subject to sampling variability
and our EPU measures draw on fewer newspapers. In fact, re-estimating our panel VAR using only
the 12 largest states yields a peak unemployment rate response of 0.155 percentage points to a unit
standard deviation policy uncertainty shock of size 0.369.21 Re-scaling the shock size as before,
our 12-state panel VAR yields a peak unemployment response of (0.65/0.369)(0.155) = 0.27
percentage points, slightly larger than Baker et al. (2016) ﬁnd.
4.2
Robustness Checks on the Baseline VAR
We explored several alternative speciﬁcations and assumptions. First, we ﬁt analogous VAR
models to each state separately. As shown in Appendix Figure A.3, the pattern in Figure 8 holds
in the vast majority of states and is not driven by extreme behavior in a few states. Second, we
obtained similar results using shorter and longer lags in the VARs. See Figure A.4, which dis-
plays unemployment responses when using the Hamilton ﬁlter. Third, placing ln(EPU-C) last in
the Cholesky ordering also yields similar results, but peak responses are attenuated. When using
the Hamilton ﬁlter, placing ln(EPU-C) last reduces the peak unemployment response by about
12% (Figure A.5). Fourth, replacing EPU-C with EPU-N, EPU-S, or EPU-BBD in our VAR
models yields qualitatively similar dynamic response functions but smaller peak responses in all
cases. For example, when using Hamilton-ﬁltered data, the peak unemployment response to a
unit policy uncertainty shock is 23% greater for ln(EPU-C) as compared to ln(EPU-N), 18%
greater as compared to ln(EPU-S), and 37% greater as compared to ln(EPU-BBD). This pat-
tern indicates that the broader (and tailored) nature of our ln(EPU-C) measure captures relevant
does not always coincide with the sample period they use in their VAR estimation. In addition, their multi-country
VAR system includes two variables that are unavailable at the state level: a national stock price index, and an industrial
production index. For these reasons, our comparison to their EPU shock response magnitude is not exact.
21The 12 largest states are California, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Michigan, North Carolina, New Jersey, New York,
Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, Virginia.
17


--- Page 20 ---
information that the other measures miss.
In summary, the estimated dynamic responses to state-level policy uncertainty shocks are of
modest size, estimated with good precision, and qualitatively robust to a range of alternative speci-
ﬁcations and identiﬁcation assumptions. As we show next, realized EPU shocks can have material
effects on state-level unemployment rate movements.
4.3
An Illustration: EPU Shocks and Their Effects in California
California is the largest state in the union, and its recent history features a good deal of policy-
related economic uncertainty. Motivated by these facts, we now consider the role of EPU shocks
as a driver of unemployment rate movements in the state.
As a ﬁrst step, we re-ﬁt our six-lag VAR model using monthly Hamilton-ﬁltered data on the
unemployment rate and ln(EPU-C) for California. Here, we exploit the fact that our data for Cal-
ifornia extend back to January 1985. After accounting for lags and ﬁltering, our estimation sample
runs from June 1988 to December 2019. In identifying the structural VAR, we place ln(EPU-C)
last in the recursive causal ordering. This amounts to assuming that policy uncertainty shocks have
no same-month impact on the state’s unemployment rate, while allowing the unemployment rate
shock to contemporaneously affect ln(EPU-C).
Figure A.6 displays the estimated dynamic response of California’s unemployment rate to the
identiﬁed ln(EPU-C) shock. The shape is similar to the response function in the upper right panel
in Figure 8, but the implied peak effect for a same-size shock is nearly twice as large. To see this,
multiply the peak estimated response of California’s unemployment rate (0.12) by the ratio of the
shock sizes to obtain (0.12)(0.45/.28) = 0.19. Recall that the peak response obtained from the
identiﬁed panel VAR is only 0.10, even with ln(EPU-C) placed ﬁrst in the causal ordering. Thus,
the results for California reinforce our earlier conclusion that larger states yield larger estimated
effects of policy uncertainty shocks.
We now use the structural VAR to examine the contribution of policy uncertainty shocks to
movements in California’s unemployment rate. Inspecting the time path of structural ln(EPU-C)
shocks (not shown), we ﬁnd large positive values of 59 log points in October 2000 and 42 log
18


--- Page 21 ---
points in November, followed by essentially no shock in December (-4 log points) and a sequence
of positive shocks from January to May 2001 that average 19 log points. This pattern aligns well
with our earlier discussion of the California electricity crisis in 2000-01. Surprisingly though, we
ﬁnd little trace of California’s gubernatorial recall in the path of the structural ln(EPU-C) shocks.
Next, we feed the realized shock sequences through a Wold moving-average representation
of our structural VAR. This exercise delivers a VAR-based historical decomposition of monthly
movements in California’s unemployment rate, expressed as deviations from the model-implied
equilibrium values. As seen in Figure 9, the electricity crisis produced one of two episodes in
which large upward policy uncertainty shocks elevated California’s unemployment rate by 50-60
basis points or more for an extended period. The maximal swing in California’s unemployment rate
due to policy uncertainty shocks is about two percentage points. In short, California’s experience
shows that policy uncertainty shocks materially affect state-level economic performance.
4.4
Spatial Spillover Effects
We now extend our VAR speciﬁcation to incorporate EPU shocks in neighboring states. For
each state s in month t, we compute BEPUst = P
b∈B(s) pb(EPU-Cb,t), where B(s) is the set of
states that border s and pb is the state-b share of population among states in s ∪B(s).22 This mea-
sure has two desirable properties: It weights neighboring states in proportion to their populations,
and it gets scaled down for states that are populous compared to neighboring states. This scaling
incorporates the assumption that EPU shocks in California, for example, have bigger effects on
economic activity in Oregon than the other way round. We add ln(BEPUst) to our baseline panel
VAR, placing it after ln(EPU-Cst) in the Cholesky ordering and before the unemployment rate.
As before, we include six lags of each variable and state-speciﬁc intercepts. We also use the same
sample as before, except for dropping Alaska.
Figure 10 displays the estimated responses (and 95% conﬁdence intervals) of state-level un-
employment rates to unit standard deviation upward shocks to own-state and border-state policy
22When EPU-Cb,t is missing, which happens for some smaller states early in the sample, we redeﬁne B(s) to
exclude the state in question.
19


--- Page 22 ---
uncertainty. Both shocks raise state-level unemployment by statistically signiﬁcant amounts. The
response functions have similar shapes for the two EPU shocks, which makes sense given their
similar nature. As expected, border-state EPU shocks are smaller in magnitude, as measured by
the standard deviation of the structural innovations. For own-state and border-state EPU shocks of
equal size, the peak unemployment rate response is about the same in both cases.
How important are policy uncertainty shocks for state-level unemployment rate ﬂuctuations?
One way to address this question is to consider their role in generating model-implied forecast
errors at a horizon of, say, thirty months. Using our extended panel VAR speciﬁcation, own-state
and border-adjusted EPU shocks jointly account for about one-tenth of the unemployment-rate
forecast error variance at this horizon. This result says that EPU shocks account for a modest
share of state-level unemployment ﬂuctuations. Recall, however, two results of our descriptive
analysis in Section 2.6. First, policy uncertainty is subject to occasional large upward spikes, as
shown in Figure 2. Second, these extreme episodes also tend to involve greater synchronicity in
state-level EPU movements, as shown in Figure 1 and illustrated in Figure 4. Thus, unusually large
upward shocks in own-state EPU tend to arrive at the same time as unusually large upward shocks
in border-state EPU. For both reasons, policy uncertainty shocks can occasionally drive sizable
increase in state-level unemployment rates, even though they play a minor role most of the time.
4.5
Additional Outcome Variables
We also consider VAR models that include other state-level outcome variables: the (natural)
log of housing prices, the log of new permits for private housing units, and the log of business
starts.23 Because these variables are noisier than the corresponding employment and unemploy-
ment measures, we focus on the twelve largest states, which yield sharper results. We add one
variable at a time to our baseline panel VAR, placing it last in the Cholesky ordering. As before,
we include six lags of each variable and state-speciﬁc intercepts. The sample start is determined
23As measured, respectively, by the FHFA House Price Index for single-family housing at www.fhfa.gov/DataTools,
the Census Bureau’s Building Permits Survey at www.census.gov/construction/bps/, and new applications for an Em-
ployer Identiﬁcation Number by businesses with a high propensity to hire. Speciﬁcally, we use the seasonally adjusted
HBA series available from the U.S. Census Bureau at https://www.census.gov/econ/bfs/index.html.
20


--- Page 23 ---
by data availability and continues through December 2019.
Appendix Figures A.7 and A.8 display the estimated dynamic responses to own-state EPU-
C shocks. Unemployment responses remain highly signiﬁcant and are not much affected by the
additional variables. Upward EPU shocks reduce new housing permits and home prices. The
impact on housing permits is statistically signiﬁcant but small, peaking at about minus one percent
after ﬁve months. It vanishes within a year and then reverses. The negative effect on home prices
holds for HP-ﬁltered and raw data but not for Hamilton-ﬁltered data. Upward EPU shocks impart
a signiﬁcant negative effect on business formation when using Hamilton-ﬁltered data but not when
using HP-ﬁltered or raw data. In short, the evidence favors the view that policy uncertainty shocks
depress housing markets, and perhaps business formation as well, but these results are weaker and
more fragile than the earlier results for employment and unemployment.
5
EPU and Economic Performance during the Pandemic
COVID-19 led to enormous increases in policy uncertainty (Figure 2), more so in some states
than others. As an indication of this heterogeneity, the cross-state standard deviation of the change
in EPU-C from 2019 to the third quarter of 2020 is 44 log points. We now use this state-level
variation to develop evidence on how the pandemic raised policy uncertainty and how, in turn,
policy uncertainty relates to state-level economic performance during the pandemic.
5.1
What Drove Policy Uncertainty during the Pandemic?
We consider two hypotheses about the drivers of state-level EPU during the pandemic:
1. Policy uncertainty rises with the severity of the pandemic’s health consequences.
2. Policy uncertainty rises with the extent of government-mandated restrictions on economic
and social activities.
The ﬁrst hypothesis captures the view that greater pandemic severity generates more uncer-
tainty about how policy makers will respond and about the economic consequences of their re-
sponses. To operationalize this hypothesis, we measure severity as quarterly COVID deaths per
21


--- Page 24 ---
capita in the state.24 Of course, deaths alone do not capture the full range of health consequences
associated with COVID-19. We use data on deaths because they are readily available, of relatively
high quality, comparable across states and over time, and correlated with other health outcomes
associated with COVID. In short, per capita deaths are a reasonable and practical proxy for the
severity of a pandemic’s health consequences.25
Our second hypothesis reﬂects the idea that government restrictions on activity create economic
uncertainty, and that more extensive restrictions create greater uncertainty. To operationalize this
hypothesis, we consider four types of government orders that were widely deployed during the
pandemic:
• Shelter-in-place orders (SIPOs) that conﬁne persons to their residences except when per-
forming essential activities.
• Business closure orders (BCOs) that require “non-essential” businesses in multiple industries
to halt operations.
• Restaurant closure orders (RCOs) that cover bars, restaurants, taverns, and other eating fa-
cilities while typically allowing take-out and delivery services.
• School closure orders (SCOs).
We combine data on these four types of orders to create a Lockdown Stringency Index for each
state from the second quarter of 2020 through the second quarter of 2021.
Speciﬁcally, for a given state and month, we set SIPO = 1 when a shelter-in-place order is in
effect, 0 otherwise. We assign a fractional value if the SIPO is in effect for a fraction of the month.
We deﬁne BCO, RCO, and SCO analogously. In using these state-level indicator variables,
we treat RCOs (i.e., restaurant closure orders) as a limited form of the broader BCOs. We treat
24Our data on death rates are from the COVID Data Tracker provided by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention at https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker/#datatracker-home. We average the
daily data to the quarterly level for each state.
25Alternatively, one might consider COVID case rates per capita. However, using case rates to proxy for pandemic
severity is highly problematic for two reasons. First, reported case rates depend on testing rates, which vary greatly
across states and over time. Second, conditional on contracting COVID, the likelihood of death or serious illness
changed greatly as treatments improved, vaccination rates rose, and the demographic mix of infected persons shifted.
For both reasons, case rates are an unsuitable measure for our purposes. That said, our results are not materially
different when using reported case rates in place of death rates.
22


--- Page 25 ---
the combination of a BCO and SCO as equivalent to a SIPO. Thus, we compute the following
Lockdown Stringency Index value for each state and month:
LSI = Max{SIPO, 0.75 ∗BCO + 0.25 ∗SCO, 0.25 ∗RCO + 0.25 ∗SCO},
(5)
which ranges from 0 to 1. We then average the LSI values over months in the calendar quarter to
obtain the state’s quarterly Lockdown Stringency Index value. Appendix A.4 describes our data
sources for government orders and provides more details about our calculations.
To assess hypotheses 1 and 2, we estimate least-squares regressions of the following form:
ln(EPU-Cs,q/EPU-Cs,2019) = c + β1CDRs,q + β2LSIs,q, +ϵs,q,
(6)
where the dependent variable is the log change in EPU-C for state s from 2019 to quarter q for
q = 2020Q2, 2020Q3, ..., 2021Q2; CDRs,q is COVID deaths per 100,000 persons in state s during
quarter q; LSIs,q is the Lockdown Stringency Index value for state s in q ; and ϵs,q is an error term.
Since CDR and LSI equal zero in 2019, (6) is effectively a difference-in-difference regression.
We ﬁt (6) separately for each q in light of frequent references in the popular discourse to “COVID
fatigue,” “mounting resistance to government restrictions,” and the like. These developments may
have prompted changes over time in how newspapers reported on pandemic-related policy uncer-
tainty. The regulatory approval of anti-COVID vaccines in December 2020 – widely perceived as
a watershed development – may also have altered newspaper coverage of uncertainties associated
with the pandemic.
Table 2 reports the results of estimating (6) for several values of q. To our surprise, we ﬁnd
no evidence that greater COVID death rates in a state raised its level of policy uncertainty. The
marginally signiﬁcant coefﬁcient on CDR in column (3) says that states with greater COVID death
rates in the fourth quarter of 2020 experienced smaller increases in EPU-C from 2019 to 2020
Q4 – the opposite of the hypothesized effect. None of the other regressions in Table 2 yield a
statistically signiﬁcant effect of COVID death rates on own-state policy uncertainty.
In contrast, we ﬁnd strong evidence that states with stricter lockdowns had larger increases
in policy uncertainty relative to 2019. This pattern holds for each value of q in Table 2, with
23


--- Page 26 ---
some attenuation by the second quarter of 2021. A unit standard deviation between-state LSI
differential of 0.32 in the third quarter of 2020, for example, implies an increase in state-level
policy uncertainty (relative to 2019) of 24 log points. That is more than one-half the standard
deviation of the corresponding dependent variable for column (2) in Table 2. Bin scatters displayed
in Appendix Figure A.9 indicate that this pattern is not driven by a few outliers among the states. In
unreported results, we ﬁnd weaker evidence that states with higher values of LSI also experienced
an increase in the ratio of EPU-S to EPU-N after the onset of the pandemic.
In summary, we ﬁnd no evidence that the severity of COVID-related health consequences af-
fected state-level policy uncertainty during the pandemic. We ﬁnd strong evidence that policy
uncertainty rose more in states with stricter government-mandated lockdowns.
5.2
State-Level Economic Performance During the Pandemic
We now investigate how state-level economic performance during the pandemic relates to pan-
demic severity, lockdown stringency, and policy uncertainty. To do so, we estimate state-level
difference-in-difference regressions of the following form:
UNs,q −UNs,2019 = a + γ1CDRs,q + γ2LSIs,q, +γ3ln(EPU-Cs,q/EPU-Cs,2019) + φs,q,
(7)
where the dependent variable is the change in the unemployment rate for state s from 2019 to
quarter q for q = 2020Q2, 2020Q3, ..., 2021Q2, and φs,q is a regression error.
Table 3 reports the results. There are three messages. First, we ﬁnd no evidence that pandemic
severity matters for a state’s relative economic performance. Second, states that imposed stricter
lockdowns had bigger unemployment rate increases relative to 2019. As an example, consider the
regression for q = 2020Q2. Multiplying the LSI coefﬁcient by a unit standard deviation differen-
tial in LSI values across states in 2020Q2 gives (4.11)(0.24) = 0.99, essentially one percentage
point. Analogous calculations for the other values of q yield unemployment responses that range
from 0.56 to 0.84 percentage points. Thus, there is clear evidence that stricter lockdowns were as-
sociated with sharper state-level unemployment rate increases during the pandemic. Third, there is
weaker evidence that state-level unemployment also rose with increases in policy uncertainty dur-
24


--- Page 27 ---
ing the pandemic (conditional on lockdown stringency and pandemic severity). Multiplying the
coefﬁcient on the log change in EPU-C in column (2) by its unit standard deviation differential
across states gives (1.51)(0.244) = 0.66, nearly two-thirds of a percentage point.
These results suggest that stricter (and longer) lockdowns and higher policy uncertainty both
raised a state’s unemployment rate during the pandemic. Still, caution is warranted in drawing
causal inferences from these regression results. States may differ in unobserved ways that inﬂu-
enced both the vulnerability of their economies to the COVID-19 pandemic and their choices over
lockdown policies. In addition, states that imposed stricter lockdowns may also have adopted other
policies that raised unemployment. Thus, we see the results in Table 3 as strong motivation for
more research into the effects of lockdown mandates and policy uncertainty during the pandemic
on unemployment during (and after) the pandemic.
6
Concluding Remarks
We tap digital archives for thousands of newspapers to construct three monthly indexes of
economic policy uncertainty (EPU) for each U.S. state: one that captures state and local sources of
policy uncertainty (EPU-S), one that captures national and international sources (EPU-N), and
a composite index that captures both (EPU-C). Our indexes date to 1985 for some states and are
freely available at www.PolicyUncertainty.com with regular updates.
Drawing on our indexes and other state-level data, we develop several new ﬁndings about the
sources of policy uncertainty and its relationship to state-level economic performance:
The Importance of State and Local Policy
State and local matters are major sources of policy uncertainty. Even before COVID-19, half
of all newspaper articles that feed into our composite EPU index discuss state and local policy.
That share rose to 62% in the period from March 2020 (when the pandemic struck in force) to June
2021 (the end of our sample period).
The Pandemic and Policy Uncertainty
The COVID-19 pandemic drove huge increases in policy uncertainty, pushing (average) EPU-
25


--- Page 28 ---
N to 2.7 times its pre-COVID peak and (average) EPU-S to more than four times its previous
peak. Policy uncertainty rose more sharply in states with stricter lockdowns – as measured by the
incidence and duration of shelter-in-place orders, business closure orders, restaurant closure orders,
and school closure orders. This lockdown effect is large relative to between-state variation in
pandemic-era jumps in policy uncertainty. Surprisingly, policy uncertainty exhibits no discernible
response to pandemic severity, as measured by COVID deaths per capita in the state.
Elections and Policy Uncertainty
Elections are recurring sources of state-level policy uncertainty. Close elections (vote margin
less then four percent) bring especially large increases in policy uncertainty. We estimate that a
close presidential election contest raises EPU-N by 60 percent and a close gubernatorial contest
raises EPU-S by 35 percent. The richness of our state-level data lets us estimate these election
effects with good precision, while controlling for several potential confounders.
Other Sources of Policy Uncertainty
The cross-state average of our EPU-N indexes rose in response to 9-11, Gulf Wars I and II,
major ﬁnancial crises, the 2011 debt-ceiling crisis, the 2012 ﬁscal cliff episode, the June 2016
Brexit referendum, trade policy tensions during the Trump presidency, and partial federal gov-
ernment shutdowns that commenced in October 2013 and December 2018. As we illustrate by
example, EPU-S can rise sharply in reaction to shocks that interact with poor policy design (Cal-
ifornia’s electricity crisis of 2000-01), political turmoil in the wake of economic mismanagement
(California’s gubernatorial recall in 2003), major tax reforms that aim to promote economic de-
velopment (the Kansas tax experiment of 2012), natural disasters that raise questions about how
policymakers will respond (Louisiana after Hurricane Katrina in 2005), and state-speciﬁc expo-
sures to major national developments and policy actions (Michigan in the Great Recession).
Upward Policy Uncertainty Shocks Foreshadow Weaker Economic Activity
Upward policy uncertainty innovations in VAR models foreshadow higher state-level unem-
ployment rates and lower employment, with peak responses of modest size about one year later.
26


--- Page 29 ---
They also foreshadow lower home prices and fewer new permits for housing construction. As illus-
trated by California’s experience, realized EPU shocks can generate sizable swings in state-level
unemployment rates – about two percentage points in California’s case.
Policy Uncertainty Shocks Spill Over Across State Borders
Own-state economic activity also deteriorates in the wake of upward policy uncertainty shocks
in neighboring states. Own-state and border-state policy uncertainty shocks of equal size have
similar effects on own-state unemployment rates.
Lockdowns, Policy Uncertainty, and State-Level Performance during the Pandemic
States that imposed stricter lockdowns during the pandemic had bigger jumps in unemploy-
ment, conditional on pandemic severity and policy uncertainty. Bigger increases in state-level
policy uncertainty during the pandemic also came with bigger increases in unemployment. There
are sound reasons for caution in drawing causal inferences from these patterns, as we discuss.
Nevertheless, they highlight the value of more research into how lockdown stringency and policy
uncertainty during the pandemic affected unemployment and other outcomes.
The foregoing summary underscores the usefulness of our new state-level EPU indexes. We
see several fruitful directions for future research:
(1) How does political polarization inﬂuence election-related policy uncertainty? It’s natural
to hypothesize that elections generate more uncertainty when the electorate is more polarized.
Baker et al. (2020) ﬁnd support for this view in the behavior of national policy uncertainty around
U.S. presidential elections. By exploiting state-level data on EPU, polarization and elections, it
becomes feasible to scrutinize this hypothesis more carefully and to differentiate among the effects
of different types of political polarization.
(2) Why has U.S. policy uncertainty drifted upward since the late 1960s? Baker et al. (2014)
advance two explanations for this drift. One stresses growth in government spending, taxes, and
regulation. Another stresses increased political polarization and its implications for the policy-
making process and policy choices. Both explanations ﬁnd support in the evidence they amass,
but it’s hard to develop a convincing evaluation based only on national data. Our work opens the
27


--- Page 30 ---
door to a more persuasive assessment that exploits the abundant state-level variation in government
growth, polarization, and – now – policy uncertainty.
(3) How does uncertainty affect ﬁrm-level investment and employment? Much previous re-
search tackles this question using panel regression designs and identiﬁcation strategies that exploit
election-related uncertainty and national policy uncertainty measures. Prominent examples include
Baker et al. (2016), Gulen and Ion (2016) and Jens (2017). Our state-level EPU indexes greatly
expand the measured variation that is available to study how ﬁrms respond to policy uncertainty.
(4) How does the categorical mix of policy uncertainty vary across states and over time within
states? Given the volume and topical density of newspaper articles, it is feasible to construct state-
level measures of policy uncertainty for particular policy categories. By adapting the newspaper-
based methods in Baker et al. (2016), Husted et al. (2020), and Caldara et al. (2020), one could
construct state-level measures of uncertainties related to tax policy, government spending, labor
market policy, monetary policy, trade policy, and more. Such measures would provide new tools
for studying the drivers of policy uncertainty and effects on ﬁrm-level and state-level outcomes.
28


--- Page 31 ---
References
Hites Ahir, Nick Bloom, and Davide Furceri. The world uncertainty index. Working Paper, 2018.
David Albuoy. The uneven geographic burden of federal taxation. Journal of Political Economy,
2009.
Michelle Alexopoulos and Jon Cohen. The power of print: Uncertainty shocks, markets, and the
economy. International Review of Economics and Finance, 40, 2015.
Dave Altig, Scott Baker, Jose Maria Barrero, Nicholas Bloom, Philip Bunn, Scarlet Chen, Steven J.
Davis, Julia Leather, Brent Meyer, Emil Mihaylov, Paul Mizen, Nicholas Parker, Thomas Re-
nault, Pawel Smietanka, and Gregory Thwaites. Economic uncertainty before and during the
covid-19 pandemic. Journal of Public Economics, 2020.
Elif C. Arbatli, Steven J. Davis, Arata Ito, and Naoko Miake. Policy uncertainty in japan. Journal
of the Japanese and International Economies, 2022.
Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Patrick J. Kehoe. Financial frictions and ﬂuctuations in volatility.
Journal of Political Economy, 2019.
Alexander Arnon, John Ricco, and Kent Smetters. Epidemiological and economic effects of lock-
down. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall:61–108, 2020.
Elliott Ash, Massimo Morelli, and Matia Vannoni. More laws, more growth? evidence from u.s.
states. Working Paper, 2020.
Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom, Brandice Canes-Wrone, Steven J. Davis, and Jonathan Rodden.
Why has us policy uncertainty risen since 1960? American Economic Review, 104(5):56–60,
May 2014.
Scott R Baker, Nick Bloom, and Steven J Davis. Measuring economic policy uncertainty. Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, 2016.
Scott R Baker, Aniket Baksy, Nick Bloom, Steven J Davis, and Jonathan A Rodden. Elections,
political polarization, and economic uncertainty. NBER Working Paper 27961, 2020.
Marc F. Bellemare and Casey J. Wichman. Elasticities and the inverse hyperbolic sine transforma-
tion. Oxford Bulletin of Economic Statistics, 82(1):50–61, 2020.
Ben S Bernanke. Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 1983.
Saroj Bhattarai, Arpita Chatterjee, and Park Woong Young. Global spillover effects of us uncer-
tainty. Journal of Monetary Economics, 114, 2020.
Nick Bloom. Fluctuations in uncertainty. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28, 2014.
James Bushnell. California electricity crisis: A market apart? Energy Policy, 32(9), 2004.
29


--- Page 32 ---
Dario Caldara, Matteo Iacoviello, Patrick Molligo, Adrea Prestipino, and Andrea Raffo.
The
economic effects of trade policy uncertainty. Journal of Monetary Policy, 109:38–59, 2020.
Brandice Canes-Wrone and Jee-Kwang Park. Electoral business cycles in oecd countries. Ameri-
can Political Science Review, 2012.
Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi. A primer on vector autoregressions. slides, undated.
Lawrence J. Christiano, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. Risk shocks. American Economic
Review, 2014.
Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber. The cost of the covid-19 crisis: Lock-
downs, macroeconomic expectations, and consumer spending. NBER W.P. 27141, 2020.
Valentina Colombo. Economic policy uncertainty in the u.s.: Does it matter for the euro area?
Economics Letters, 121, 2013.
Steven J. Davis. An index of global economic policy uncertainty. Macroeconomic Review, 2016.
Steven J. Davis and John Haltiwanger. On the driving forces behind cyclical movements in em-
ployment and job reallocation. American Economic Review, 89(5):1234–1257, 1999.
Steven J. Davis, Prakash Loungani, and Ramamohan Mahidhara. Regional labor ﬂuctuations: Oil
shocks, military spending, and other driving forces. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, International Finance Discussion Papers Number 578, 1997.
Steven J. Davis, Dingqian Liu, and Xuguang Simon Sheng. Stock prices and economic activity in
the time of coronavirus. IMF Economic Review, 2021.
Janice C. Eberly. Adjustment of consumers’ durables stocks: Evidence from automobile purchases.
Journal of Political Economy, 1994.
Redouane Elkamhi, Chanik Jo, and Marco Salerno. Measuring state-level economic policy uncer-
tainty. Working Paper, 2021.
Marcel Fafchamps and Flore Gubert. The formation of risk-sharing groups. Journal of Develop-
ment Economics, 83, 2006.
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, Keith Kuester, and Juan Rubio-Ramírez.
Fiscal volatility shocks and economic activity. American Economic Review, 2015.
Francesco Giavazzi and Michael McMahon. Policy Uncertainty and Household Savings. The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(2):517–531, May 2012.
Simon Gilchrist, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajsek. Uncertainty, ﬁnancial frictions, and investment
dynamics. Working paper 2014-69, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Divisions of
Research and Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, 2014.
Austan Goolsbee, Nicole Bei Luo, Roxanne Nesbitt, and Chad Syverson. Covid-10 lockdown
policies at the state and local level. Becker-Friedman Institute Working Paper, 2020.
30


--- Page 33 ---
Huseyin Gulen and Mihai Ion. Policy Uncertainty and Corporate Investment. The Review of
Financial Studies, 29(3):523–564, September 2016.
James D Hamilton. Why you should never use the hodrick-prescott ﬁlter. Review of Economics
and Statistics, 100(5):831–843, 2018.
Tarek Hassan, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun. Firm-level political
risk: Measurement and effects. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019.
Lucas Husted, John Rogers, and Bo Sun. Monetary policy uncertainty. Journal of Monetary Policy,
115(1):20–36, 2020.
Candace A. Jens. Political uncertainty and investment: Causal evidence from u.s. gubernatorial
elections. Journal of Financial Economics, 124(3):563–579, 2017.
Paul Joskow. The california electricity crisis. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 17(3), 2001.
Brandon Julio and Youngsuk Yook. Political uncertainty and corporate investment cycles. Journal
of Finance, 2012.
Brandon Julio and Youngsuk Yook. Policy uncertainty, irreversibility, and cross-border ﬂows of
capital. Journal of International Economics, 2016.
Bryan Kelly, L’ubos Pastor, and Pietro Veronesi. The price of political uncertainty: Theory and
evidence from the option market. The Journal of Finance, 71(5):2417–2480, 2016.
Stefan Klössner and Rodrigo Sekkel. International spillovers of policy uncertainty. Economics
Letters, 124, 2014.
Robert McDonald and David Siegel. The value of waiting to invest. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 1986.
Haroon Mumtaz, Laura Sunder-Plassman, and Angeliki Theophilopoulou. The state-level impact
of uncertainty shocks. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2018.
Emi Nakamura and Jon Steinsson. Fiscal stimulus in a monetary union: Evidence from us regions.
American Economic Review, 2014.
Ryan Nunn, Jana Parsons, and Jay Shambaugh. Nine facts about state and local policy. The
Hamilton Project, The Brookings Institution, 2019.
Ezgi Ozturk and Xuguang Sheng. Measuring global and country-speciﬁc uncertainty. Working
Paper, 2018.
L’uboš Pástor and Pietro Veronesi. Political uncertainty and risk premia. Journal of Financial
Economics, 2013.
Christopher Rauh. Measuring uncertainty at the regional level using newspaper text. University of
Montreal Working Paper, 2019.
31


--- Page 34 ---
Daniel Shoag and Stan Veuger. Uncertainty and the geography of the great recession. Journal of
Monetary Economics, 84, 2016.
Frank A. Wolak. Diagnosing the california electricity crisis. The Electricity Journal, 16(7), 2003.
32


--- Page 35 ---
Figure 1: The Level and Composition of State-Level EPU Index Values, Cross-State Averages, Quarterly Data
Notes: The height of each bar is the equal-weighted mean over states of the state-level EPU-C values (composite index) in the indicated
quarter. The breakdown within each bar reﬂects the contribution of articles that contain only national policy terms, those that contain
only state and local policy terms, and those that contain both.
33


--- Page 36 ---
Figure 2: Average Values of EPU-S (Solid Blue) and EPU-N (Dashed Orange) by Month
Notes: The ﬁgure plots equal-weighted cross-state average values of EPU-S and EPU-N by month. We cover all states from January
2006 onward, 38 states from 1996 onward, and 12 states throughout the period from January 1985 to June 2021.
34


--- Page 37 ---
Figure 3: Ratio of EPU-S to EPU-N around Elections
Notes: This chart plots the coefﬁcients from two regressions of state-month values of (EPU-S /
EPU-N) on a collection of indicator variables for -10, -9, ... 9, 10 months to or from an election
of the indicated type. Both regressions include controls for the contemporaneous values of state-
level unemployment rates and state-level Coincident Economic Indicators produced by the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The regression for "Presidential Elections" also includes controls
for common year effects. The regression for "Gubernatorial Elections" include controls for both
common year effects and common month effects. Observations are weighted by state population.
Sample runs from January 1985 to June 2021 (unbalanced across states). Dashed lines show 95%
conﬁdence intervals with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.
35


--- Page 38 ---
Figure 4: Histograms of State-Level EPU-N Responses to National and International Events
9-11 Attacks (September 2001)
Debt Ceiling Crisis (July 2011)
Brexit Referendum (June 2016)
Trump Election Win (November 2016)
2013 Government Shutdown (October 2013)
2018 Government Shutdown (December 2018)
Notes: Each panel shows the fraction of states with ln(EPU-Ns,t

EPU-Ns,t−1) values in the
indicated bins (width = 25 log points), where t is the year and month stated in the panel heading.
36


--- Page 39 ---
Figure 5: EPU-S and EPU-N in California, 1997 to 2006
Notes: The ﬁgure plots quarterly averages of monthly EPU-S and EPU-N values for California in a ten-year period around its 2000-01
electricity crisis and its 2003 gubernatorial recall.
37


--- Page 40 ---
Figure 6: EPU-S and EPU-N in Kansas, Louisiana, and Michigan
Kansas
Louisiana
Michigan
Notes: This ﬁgure plots quarterly averages of monthly EPU-S and EPU-N values for Kansas, Louisiana, and Michigan in selected
time periods.
38


--- Page 41 ---
Figure 7: Average Ratio of EPU-S to EPU-N by State and Period
Notes: Red dots show average monthly ratios of EPU-S to EPU-N by state in the post-COVID
period from March 2020 to June 2021. Blue dots show average (EPU-S/EPU-N) values in the
pre-COVID period before March 2020. Sample start dates in the pre-COVID period vary across
states from 1985-2006, as listed in Appendix Table A.2. We order states by the average pre-COVID
values of (EPU-S/EPU-N).
39


--- Page 42 ---
Figure 8: Employment and Unemployment Rate Responses to Unit Standard Deviation ln(EPU-C) Shocks
100*ln(Employment)
Unemployment Rate
Notes: Each panel shows estimated dynamic responses of the activity measure to a unit standard EPU-C shock (with 95% conﬁdence
intervals), the peak response, and standard deviation of the identiﬁed shocks. To obtain these results, we ﬁlter the data as indicated, ﬁt a
two-equation panel VAR model by least squares to monthly state-level data for 44 states, and place EPU-C ﬁrst in a Cholesky ordering.
The VAR system has six lags of each variable and state-speciﬁc intercepts. The estimation sample runs from July 2001 to December
2019 when using raw and HP-ﬁltered data, and from June 2004 to December 2019 when using Hamilton-ﬁltered data.
40


--- Page 43 ---
Figure 9: Historical Decomposition of California’s Unemployment Rate Movements from June
1988 to December 2019
Notes: This ﬁgure shows the historical decomposition of unemployment rate movements implied
by a structural VAR system with six lags ﬁt to Hamilton-ﬁltered monthly data on the unemploy-
ment rate and ln(EPU-C) for California from June 1988 to December 2019. In ﬁltering the raw data
(available from January 1985), we adopt Hamilton’s recommendation to look back over a two-year
business cycle (h=24) with one year of lags (p=12), which uses 35 observations. Since we lose six
additional observations due to lags in the VAR speciﬁcation, our estimation sample runs from June
1988 to December 2019. We recover structural shocks from the reduced-from VAR by placing
ln(EPU-C) last in a recursive causal ordering of the reduced-form VAR innovations. Reversing the
causal ordering yields a very similar decomposition.
41


--- Page 44 ---
Figure 10: Unemployment Rate Responses to Unit Standard Deviation ln(EPU-C) and ln(BEPU-C) Shocks
Impulse: Border EPU-C
Impulse: Own EPU-C
Notes: Each panel shows estimated responses (with 95% conﬁdence intervals) of the state-level unemployment rate to a unit standard
deviation shock to EPU-C or BEPU, the peak response, and the standard deviation of the identiﬁed shock. To obtain these results,
we ﬁlter the data as indicated, ﬁt a three-equation panel VAR model by least squares, place EPU-C ﬁrst in the Cholesky ordering, and
place BEPU second. The VAR system has six lags of each variable and state-speciﬁc intercepts. We use the same samples as in Figure
8 except for dropping Alaska.
42


--- Page 45 ---
Table 1: Election Effects on State-Level Policy Uncertainty Measures
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
VARIABLES
ln(EPU-N)
ln(EPU-N)
ln(EPU-N)
ln(EPU-S)
ln(EPU-S)
ln(EPU-S)
Presidential Election
0.32***
0.33***
0.15***
0.15***
0.15***
0.18***
(0.025)
(0.029)
(0.037)
(0.024)
(0.028)
(0.041)
Gubernatorial Election
0.049
0.033
0.022
0.061**
0.15***
0.11***
(0.033)
(0.030)
(0.034)
(0.030)
(0.030)
(0.036)
Close Presidential Election
0.31***
-0.053
(0.049)
(0.049)
Close Gubernatorial Election
0.032
0.11**
(0.056)
(0.052)
Observations
17,000
17,000
17,000
17,000
17,000
17,000
R2
0.133
0.329
0.331
0.225
0.375
0.375
Economic Controls
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
State FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Year and Month FE
NO
YES
YES
NO
YES
YES
Notes: Presidential (gubernatorial) election variables equal one in the month of and the month before a presidential (own-state guberna-
torial) election, zero otherwise. Economic controls are the monthly state-level unemployment rate and the monthly state-level Coincident
Economic Indicator from the St. Louis Federal Reserve (not available for the District of Columbia). Observations are weighted by state
population. The sample runs from January 1985 to June 2021 (unbalanced across states). In practice, we use the inverse hyperbolic
sine transformation for the dependent variable, which closely approximates the natural log transformation. Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors in parentheses.
43


--- Page 46 ---
Table 2: Policy Uncertainty Rose More in States with More Extensive Government Restrictions
Dependent Variable: log change in state-level EPU-C value from 2019 to the indicated quarter
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Quarter
2020Q2
2020Q3
2020Q4
2021Q1
2021Q2
Lockdown Stringency Index
0.59***
0.76***
0.45***
0.56***
0.34*
(0.13)
(0.14)
(0.11)
(0.16)
(0.19)
COVID Deaths
-202.0
-132.0
-1,185**
477.2
-274.8
(331.8)
(800.1)
(474.8)
(951.8)
(2,208)
Observations
51
51
51
51
51
R2
0.164
0.323
0.275
0.173
0.055
Notes: Each column pertains to a separate regression, where the dependent variable is ln(EPU-
Cs,q/EPU- Cs,2019) for the indicated quarter. Explanatory variables are state-level values of the
COVID Death Rate per 100,000 persons and the Lockdown Stringency Index value in the indi-
cated quarter. The stringency index aggregate information about shelter-in-place orders, business
closure orders, restaurant closure orders and school closure orders, as explained in Section 5.1. See
Appendix Table A.3 for summary statistics of the variables. Huber-White robust standard errors
are in parentheses.
44


--- Page 47 ---
Table 3: How State-Level Unemployment Rates Relate to Lockdown Stringency, Death Rates, and
Policy Uncertainty During the Pandemic
Dependent Variable: log change in state-level unemployment rate from 2019 to indicated quarter
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Quarter
2020Q2
2020Q3
2020Q4
2021Q1
2021Q2
Lockdown Stringency Index
4.11**
2.03***
1.94***
2.39***
1.95***
(1.97)
(0.66)
(0.54)
(0.44)
(0.62)
COVID Death Rate
4,051
-4,647
-716.3
954.0
-54.63
(3,289)
(4,778)
(2,031)
(3,353)
(10,961)
∆ln(EPU-C) 2020Q2
2.86
(1.91)
∆ln(EPU-C) 2020Q3
1.51**
(0.70)
∆ln(EPU-C) 2020Q4
0.84
(0.68)
∆ln(EPU-C) 2021Q1
0.33
(0.43)
∆ln(EPU-C) 2021Q2
0.58*
(0.33)
Observations
51
51
51
51
51
R2
0.324
0.286
0.324
0.383
0.251
Notes: Each column pertains to a separate regression, where the dependent variable is the change
in the state-level unemployment rate from 2019 to the indicated calendar quarter. Explanatory
variables are state-level values of (a) the COVID Death Rate per 100,000 persons in the indicated
quarter, (b) the Lockdown Stringency Index value in the indicated quarter, and (c) the log change in
the state-level composite EPU index value from 2019 to the indicated quarter. See Appendix Table
A.3 for summary statistics of the variables. Huber-White robust standard errors are in parentheses.
45


--- Page 48 ---
A
Online Appendix Materials
A.1
Flagging Newspaper Articles about State-Level EPU
Table A.1 reports the terms in our Economy, Uncertainty, and National Policy term sets and
in the State Policy set for Michigan. State Policy term sets differ across states in line with how
they refer to legislative and judicial bodies, regulatory agencies, and state and local government
ofﬁcials. State Policy sets include “initiative" and “referendum" in states that have provisions for
putting votes about policy matters before the citizenry. The full collection of State Policy sets is
available at https://policyuncertainty.com/state_epu_terms.htm. To facilitate comparison to earlier
work, Table A.1 also reports the term sets devised by Baker et al. (2016).
Media markets can extend across state borders. Thus, one might worry that a newspaper asso-
ciated with State A contains many articles about policy uncertainty in a bordering State B, simply
because the paper has signiﬁcant readership in B. We exclude newspapers with national reach, pre-
cisely because it’s unclear how to situate them geographically. For example, Investor’s Business
Daily, the New York Times, USA Today, Wall Street Journal, and Washington Post are not in our
sample. Of course, there are other newspapers with readerships in more than one state. We have no
effective way to precisely measure the geography of each paper’s readership. Instead, as a simple
check, we identiﬁed the newspapers in our sample that publish in Metropolitan Statistical Areas
that span more than one state. These multi-state MSA papers publish in places like New York, DC,
Chicago, and Philadelphia. There are fewer than 60 such papers in our entire sample. Especially
because we do not weight by circulation when aggregating over newspapers, there are too few of
these papers to seriously distort our state-level EPU measures. Moreover, if multi-state readership
were to cause newspaper coverage of policy uncertainty to bleed over to bordering states in a large
way, we would expect to see stronger EPU co-movements for neighboring states. However, we
ﬁnd no such pattern in the dyadic regression analysis reported in Section 2.6.
A.2
State-Level EPU Coverage and Additional Descriptive Statistics
For each state, Table A.2 reports the sample start year for our EPU-S, EPU-N, EPU-C,
and EPU-BBD indexes, the minimum and maximum number of newspapers that feed into the
index construction, and the average circulation of the newspapers used to construct the indexes in
2016. Figure A.1 plots the average between-state EPU correlations in rolling samples of the last
46


--- Page 49 ---
60 observations. The top and bottom panels show, respectively, the average of the pairwise level
and change correlations. The 9-11 attacks, the ﬁnancial crisis in September 2008, the onset of the
COVID pandemic, and (to a lesser extent) the November 2016 election victory of Donald Trump
brought abrupt increases in the average pairwise correlations. Figure A.2 shows how each state’s
EPU measures correlate with their national-average counterparts.
A.3
VAR Models, Identiﬁcation, and Additional Results
This section of the appendix describes our structural VAR models, articulates the assumptions
we adopt to identify them, and presents additional results referenced in the main text.
Recall that we ﬁt panel VAR models by OLS to monthly data on Yst = (ln(EPU-Cst), UNst)′,
where UNst is the unemployment rate for state s in month t, and ln(EPU-Cst) is the natural log of
the state’s composite EPU index value in month t.26 We treat ln(EPU-Cst) and UNst as covariance
stationary processes. Our baseline structural VAR model is
Yst = ˜αs +
6
X
i=1
AiYs,t−i + Bϵst,
(A.1)
where ϵst = (ϵEPU
st
, ϵUN
st )′ is a 2x1 vector of serially and mutually uncorrelated structural inno-
vations, Ai and B are 2x2 coefﬁcient matrices common across states, and ˜αs is a 2x1 vector of
state-speciﬁc constants.
This structural VAR embeds two assumptions that warrant brief remarks. First, it neglects spa-
tial interactions, e.g., own-state shocks with spillover effects on other states. We relax this assump-
tion in Section 4.4. Second, following standard practice, we assume for each s that corr(ϵEPU
st
, ϵUN
st ) =
0 in the time-series dimension. Although it often passes without mention in the structural VAR
literature, the assumption of contemporaneously uncorrelated structural innovations (for a given
geographic unit) is a substantive restriction. See Davis and Haltiwanger (1999) for discussion and
an analysis of identiﬁcation when relaxing this assumption.
Given (A.1), we consider various assumptions to identify the structural innovations – “shocks,”
as we call them in the main text. For example, to obtain the impulse response functions in Figure
8, we posit a recursive structure that lets us decompose the reduced-form VAR errors (i.e., the OLS
26The main text also considers VARs with ln(EMPst) in place of UNst, where EMPst denotes employment in
state s and month t. We couch the discussion here in terms of the unemployment rate for the sake of concreteness.
47


--- Page 50 ---
regression residuals) according to est = Bϵst:
et ≡

eEPU
st
eUN
st

=

1
0
b21
1



ϵEPU
st
ϵUN
st


(A.2)
That is, we identify shocks by placing ln(EPU-C) ﬁrst in a recursive causal ordering. Assumption
(A.2) also sufﬁces to identify the elements of the A matrices in (A.1).
Inverting the identiﬁed structural VAR yields its moving-average representation for state s,
Yst = αs +
∞
X
i=0
Ciϵs,t−i
(A.3)
The elements in the ﬁrst column and second row of the Ci matrices give the dynamic responses of
UNs,t+i to a unit-size ϵEPU
st
shock for i = 0, 1, 2, ..., as plotted in Figure 8.
Figures A.3, A.4 and A.5 report additional VAR-based results referenced in Section 4.1. To
obtain the response functions displayed in Figure A.3, we ﬁt the reduced-form VAR separately for
each state and rely on recursive ordering (A.2) to recover structural VARs with distinct Ai and B
matrices for each state, which yields the state-speciﬁc dynamic response functions plotted in the
ﬁgure. For Figure A.4, we alter the lag lengths in the baseline VAR model (A.1), as indicated in
the ﬁgure, and again rely on the recursive ordering (A.2) for identiﬁcation. For Figure A.5, we
place ln(EPU-C) last in the recursive causal ordering to identify (A.1).
Figure 9 in Section 4.3 reports a VAR-based historical decomposition of ﬂuctuations in Cali-
fornia’s unemployment rate. To obtain this decomposition, we ﬁt a VAR to the monthly data for
California and place ln(EPU-C) last in the recursive causal ordering to identify structural shocks
and obtain the structural VAR. We then use the Wold moving-average representation of the struc-
tural VAR to obtain the model-implied contributions of the shocks (i.e., past and current values
of ϵEPU
t
and ϵUN
t
) to the deviation of California’s unemployment rate from its equilibrium value
at each t. See slides 76 and 77 in Cesa-Bianchi (undated) for an explicit statement of the decom-
position. Figure A.6 displays the dynamic response of California’s unemployment rate to a unit
standard deviation shock in its own ln(EPU-C) value.
Figures A.7 and A.8 display dynamic response functions to own-state ln(EPU-C) shocks for
the expanded VAR speciﬁcations discussed in Section 4.5.
48


--- Page 51 ---
A.4
Measuring the Stringency of Government Lockdown Orders
We obtain daily state-level data on shelter-in-place orders (SIPOs), non-essential business clo-
sure orders (BCOs), restaurant closure orders (RCOs), and school closure orders (SCOs) from the
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF) at https://www.kff.org/report-section/state-covid-19-data-and-
policy-actions-policy-actions/ (accessed November 2021). We average the daily state-level values
to calendar months. If a given order type was in place during only part of the month, we discount
the corresponding indicator value accordingly. For example, if a state had a shelter-in-place order
in effect for half the month, we set its SIPO value for that month to one-half.
For April and May 2020, we use data with more geographic granularity. In particular, we
obtain weekly, county-level data on SCOs from Keystone Strategy at
https://www.keystonestrategy.com/coronavirus-covid19-intervention-dataset-model/ (accessed 28
October 2020). We obtain county-level data for SIPOs, BCOs, and RCOs from Goolsbee et al.
(2020), who provide the dates on which these orders went into effect and were lifted. We use their
dates to determine whether a given order type was in effect for each county by week, regardless of
whether the order originated at the state or county level.27 We then aggregate county-level indicator
values for April and May 2020 to the state level using county-level population shares.28
Armed with our monthly state-level values for SIPO, BCO, RCO and SCO, we plug them
into equation (5) in the main text to obtain monthly, state-level values for our Lockdown Stringency
Index. As a ﬁnal step, we average over months in the calendar quarter for each state to obtain the
quarterly, state-level index values.
A.5
Additional Material for Section 5
Table A.3 reports summary statistics for the variables used in the regression analyses reported
in Tables 2 and 3 in the main text. Figure A.9 displays scatter plots that supplement the regression
results reported in Table 2.
27In some instances, their observations reﬂect city-level government orders. We omit city-level orders that do not
extend to the entire county. The Goolsbee et al. (2020) data end in May 2020, which precludes us from extending the
granular geographic approach beyond that month.
28When aggregating over counties to obtain a state-level SCO value, we restrict attention to counties with SCO
data. In effect, we treat missing SCO data as missing at random. In practice, this assumption is unlikely to matter
much, because counties with SCO data account for most of the population.
49


--- Page 52 ---
Figure A.1: Average Between-State Correlations of the EPU Measures, Levels and Changes
Notes: The top panel reports the average pairwise between-state correlation of the EPU-S values
(red) and the EPU-N values (blue) by month. The bottom panel reports the average pairwise
between-state correlations of monthly changes in the EPU-S and EPU-N values. We compute
the pairwise correlations using backward 60-month rolling windows.
50


--- Page 53 ---
Figure A.2: Correlations of State-Level EPU-S and EPU-N Values with National Averages
Notes: The top chart shows a heat map for the correlation of each state’s EPU-S measure with
the national EPU-S value, computed as the equal-weighted average of the EPU-S values across
states. The bottom chart shows the analogous heat map for EPU-N. We calculate the correlations
using all available months for each state from January 1990 to December 2019. EPU-S and
EPU-N correlations are 0.54 and 0.59 for Hawaii and 0.25 and 0.23 for Alaska.
51


--- Page 54 ---
Figure A.3: Unemployment Rate Responses to Unit Standard Deviation Own-State ln(EPU-C)
Shocks, Using a Separate VAR Model for Each State
Notes: We ﬁt a separate six-lag VAR for each state using the same data as in Figure 8. We identify
the structural VARs by placing ln(EPU-C) ﬁrst in a recursive ordering. Each line in one of the
charts shows a single state’s dynamic unemployment rate response to a unit standard deviation
innovation in the state’s identiﬁed policy uncertainty shock.
52


--- Page 55 ---
Figure A.4: Unemployment Rate Responses with Alternative Lag-Length Speciﬁcations
Notes: The middle chart is identical to the upper right chart in Figure 8, which uses Hamilton-
ﬁltered data. The other two charts report unemployment rate response functions for otherwise
identical models that consider shorter or longer lag-length speciﬁcations, as indicated. See the
notes to Figure 8 for additional information.
53


--- Page 56 ---
Figure A.5: Unemployment Rate Responses with Alternative Recursive Ordering
Notes: We place ln(EPU-C) last in the recursive ordering. Otherwise, the VAR models behind
the response functions in this ﬁgure are identical to the ones used in the right column of Figure 8.
54


--- Page 57 ---
Figure A.6: Dynamic Response of California’s Unemployment Rate to a Unit Standard Deviation
Policy Uncertainty Shock
Notes: This ﬁgure shows the dynamic response of the unemployment rate to a unit standard devia-
tion (0.28) policy uncertainty shock obtained from a structural VAR system ﬁt to Hamilton-ﬁltered
monthly data on the unemployment rate and ln(EPU-C) for California from June 1988 to Decem-
ber 2019. Our unﬁltered data are available from January 1985. In ﬁltering the data, we adopt
Hamilton’s recommendation to look back over a two-year business cycle (h=24) with one year
of lags (p=12), which uses 35 observations. Since we use an additional six lags in the VAR, our
estimation sample starts in June 1988 and runs through December 2019. We recover structural
shocks from the reduced-from VAR by placing ln(EPU-C) last in a recursive causal ordering of
the reduced-form VAR innovations. Reversing the causal ordering yields a very similar response
function.
55


--- Page 58 ---
Figure A.7: Housing Price Index and Unemployment Rate Responses to Unit Standard Deviation ln(EPU-C) Shocks
ln(Housing Price Index)
Unemployment Rate
Notes: Each panel shows estimated dynamic responses of the activity measure to a unit standard EPU-C shock (with 95% conﬁdence
intervals), the peak response, and standard deviations of the identiﬁed shocks. To obtain these results, we ﬁlter the data as indicated, ﬁt a
three-equation panel VAR model by least squares to monthly state-level data for the 12 largest states by population, and place EPU-C
ﬁrst and the Housing Price Index last in a Cholesky ordering. The VAR system has six lags of each variable and state-speciﬁc intercepts.
The estimation sample for all models runs from December 2000 to December 2019.
56


--- Page 59 ---
Figure A.8: New Housing Permits and Business Applications Responses to Unit Standard Deviation ln(EPU-C) Shocks
ln(New Housing Permits)
ln(Business Applications)
Notes: Each panel shows estimated dynamic responses of the activity measure to a unit standard EPU-C shock (with 95% (red) and
85% (blue) conﬁdence intervals), the peak response, and standard deviations of the identiﬁed shocks. To obtain these results, we ﬁlter the
data as indicated, ﬁt two separate three-equation panel VAR models by least squares to monthly state-level data for the 12 largest states
by population, and place EPU-C ﬁrst, with New Housing Permits last in the left panel, and High-Propensity Business Applications last
in the right panel, in a Cholesky ordering. The VAR system has six lags of each variable and state-speciﬁc intercepts. The estimation
sample for new housing permits runs from December 2002 to December 2019, and business applications from June 2007 to December
2019.
57


--- Page 60 ---
Figure A.9: How Log Changes in EPU-C from 2019 to the Indicated Quarter Vary with Lockdown
Stringency Index Values in the Quarter, Bin Scatters of State-Level Observations
Q2 2020
Q3 2020
Q4 2020
Q1 2021
Notes: There are 51 underlying state-level observations for each panel. See main text for explana-
tions of how we measure EPU-C and the Lockdown Stringency Index.
58


--- Page 61 ---
Table A.1: Term Sets
Terms
Economy
economic, economy
Uncertainty
uncertainty, uncertainties, uncertain
Policy Sets:
EPU-N
White House, Congress, Congressional, Federal Reserve, The Fed, Monetary Policy, Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health
Administration, NIH, FTC, Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce, USDA, IRS, Department of Defense, National Security, Depart-
ment of Homeland Security, FDA, Federal Housing Administration, SEC, CFPB, Department of Labor, Small Business
Administration, NLRB, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Immigration and Naturalization service, EPA, FERC,
HUD, Bureau of Land Management, Department of Interior, Department of Education, FCC, Fish and Wildlife Service,
Department of Transportation, US Treasury, Department of Treasury, DoJ, Department of Commerce, Department of
Energy, Presidential election, Congressional election
EPU-S
Legislature, State House of Representatives, Michigan House of Representatives, State Senate, Michigan Senate,
(Michigan)
Governor, State Attorney General, Michigan Attorney General, zoning, mayor, city council, town council, initiative,
referendum, Department of Labor and Economic Growth, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, Michigan
Department of Public Health, Michigan Charitable Gaming, Michigan Lottery, Michigan Gaming Control Board, Min-
nesota DPS Gambling Enforcement, Michigan Public Service Commission, Michigan Insurance Division, Michigan
Ofﬁce of Financial and Insurance Regulation, Corporations, Securities and Commercial Licensing Bureau, Michigan
Department of Transportation
EPU-BBD
regulation, deﬁcit, white house, legislation, congress, federal reserve, the fed, regulations, regulatory, deﬁcits, congres-
sional, legislative, legislature
Notes: In practice, we include the full names of listed agencies as well as common abbreviations (e.g., both IRS and Internal Revenue
Service). We display the EPU-S policy term set for Michigan as an example. In practice, we tailor each EPU-S policy term set to the
state in question. The full collection of EPU-S policy term sets is available at https://policyuncertainty.com/state_epu_terms.html.
.
59


--- Page 62 ---
Table A.2: Newspaper Counts, Circulation, and Start Dates by State
State
Circulation
Paper Count
Sample
State
Circulation
Paper Count
Sample
Min
Max
Start
Min
Max
Start
AK
257,723
4
14
2000
MT
344,620
5
6
2000
AL
698,084
4
42
1993
NC
1,966,247
2
97
1989
AR
681,028
18
43
2003
ND
110,357
2
19
1996
AZ
839,596
7
15
2001
NE
491,303
1
15
1985
CA
10,455,620
6
128
1985
NH
402,893
1
8
1997
CO
1,506,538
3
30
1990
NJ
2,633,831
1
35
1985
CT
1,370,828
2
32
1995
NM
316,147
2
19
1996
DC
221,255
1
1
1990
NV
1,316,367
4
15
2001
DE
221,762
1
8
2006
NY
6,025,416
5
65
1986
FL
4,632,859
2
67
1985
OH
3,047,598
2
61
1985
GA
1,733,399
1
47
1985
OK
646,373
3
33
1990
HI
704,357
5
8
2004
OR
979,874
1
30
1991
IA
535,134
3
29
1995
PA
4,852,690
3
75
1985
ID
303,349
8
11
2000
RI
375,397
1
9
1985
IL
4,243,258
1
94
1985
SC
811,249
1
36
1987
IN
1,159,771
5
54
1991
SD
113,493
3
9
2006
KS
399,954
2
28
1990
TN
943,871
2
30
1990
KY
568,867
2
35
1990
TX
7,660,621
2
92
1985
LA
818,192
2
28
1990
UT
492,209
1
11
1988
MA
2,356,844
1
49
1988
VA
1,681,519
1
41
1985
MD
1,312,260
2
18
1993
VT
161,276
3
10
2001
ME
294,064
1
6
1992
WA
1,746,418
1
26
1985
MI
2,381,031
6
58
1998
WI
1,002,215
3
26
1989
MN
2,084,738
2
23
1990
WV
315,008
2
22
1996
MO
1,639,738
1
36
1988
WY
61,303
3
5
2006
MS
379,829
8
27
2001
Notes: The reported statistics pertain to the daily and weekly newspapers that we tap in the Access
World News Newsbank database. Circulation ﬁgures refer to all covered papers in the state as
of 2016. Average Start refers to the average date that coverage begins across the papers that we
use, rounded to the nearest year. Min and Max Paper Count refer to the minimum and maximum
number of papers across all sample months for the indicated state.
60


--- Page 63 ---
Table A.3: Summary Statistics for the State-Level Variables in Tables 2 and 3
Variable
Quarter = q
N
Mean
Standard Deviation
EPUCq - EPUC2019
Q2 2020
51
1.58
0.33
EPUCq - EPUC2019
Q3 2020
51
1.08
0.44
EPUCq - EPUC2019
Q4 2020
51
0.82
0.43
EPUCq - EPUC2019
Q1 2021
51
0.59
0.50
EPUCq - EPUC2019
Q2 2021
51
0.13
0.43
COVID Deaths Per 100,000
Q2 2020
51
10.6
12.1
COVID Deaths Per 100,000
Q3 2020
51
6.75
5.20
COVID Deaths Per 100,000
Q4 2020
51
17.82
9.47
COVID Deaths Per 100,000
Q1 2021
51
16.40
6.89
COVID Deaths Per 100,000
Q2 2021
51
3.92
1.91
Lockdown Stringency Index
Q2 2020
51
0.77
0.24
Lockdown Stringency Index
Q3 2020
51
0.62
0.32
Lockdown Stringency Index
Q4 2020
51
0.55
0.34
Lockdown Stringency Index
Q1 2021
51
0.48
0.35
Lockdown Stringency Index
Q2 2021
51
0.26
0.29
Unemployment Rate
Q2 2020
51
11.73
3.29
Unemployment Rate
Q3 2020
51
7.98
2.35
Unemployment Rate
Q4 2020
51
6.25
1.82
Unemployment Rate
Q1 2021
51
5.65
1.76
Unemployment Rate
Q2 2021
51
5.27
1.61
Notes: See main text for data sources and explanations of how we construct the variable values.
61
