--- Page 1 ---
arXiv:1608.04832v1  [q-fin.EC]  17 Aug 2016
EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Monetary economics from econophysics
perspective
Victor M. Yakovenkoa
Department of Physics, CMTC and JQI, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland
20742-4111, USA
Abstract. This is an invited article for the Discussion and Debate spe-
cial issue of The European Physical Journal Special Topics on the sub-
ject “Can Economics Be a Physical Science?” The ﬁrst part of the
paper traces the personal path of the author from theoretical physics
to economics. It brieﬂy summarizes applications of statistical physics
to monetary transactions in an ensemble of economic agents. It shows
how a highly unequal probability distribution of money emerges due to
irreversible increase of entropy in the system. The second part exam-
ines deep conceptual and controversial issues and fallacies in monetary
economics from econophysics perspective. These issues include the na-
ture of money, conservation (or not) of money, distinctions between
money vs. wealth and money vs. debt, creation of money by the state
and debt by the banks, the origins of monetary crises and capitalist
proﬁt. Presentation uses plain language understandable to laypeople
and may be of interest to both specialists and general public.
1 A personal path from physics to economics
First I would like to explain the style and purpose of this article. I have published
a number of research and review papers on econophysics [1] and have given many
talks and colloquia about it. These talks are usually followed by informal discussions
with the attendees, which cover broader material than in an academic presentation.
People often ask me whether I published such a broader discussion somewhere, and
the answer has been negative until now. I would like to use the occasion of this
Discussion and Debate special issue to describe my personal research motivation
and path to melding physics and economics. I would also try to articulate and clear
up some confusion related to deep conceptual issues in monetary economics from
the standpoint of a theoretical physicist. The style of this paper is quite informal,
and the primary focus is on conceptual foundation, rather than technical details of
mathematical models and empirical data.
In 1978 I became an undergraduate student at Moscow Institute of Physics and
Technology (MIPT). I wanted to learn theoretical physics, so I started reading the
famous 10-volume Course of Theoretical Physics by L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz.
In due time I advanced to volume 5 Statistical Physics [2]. Statistical Physics is quite
diﬀerent from other branches of physics, such as Mechanics and Electrodynamics,
a e-mail: http://physics.umd.edu/~yakovenk/


--- Page 2 ---
2
Will be inserted by the editor
where time evolution of particles and ﬁelds is deterministically deﬁned by equations
of motion starting from initial conditions. Even in Quantum Mechanics, where mea-
surements involve probabilities, time evolution of the wave function is governed by the
deterministic and unitary equation of motion. In contrast, Statistical Physics studies
big ensembles of objects (such as atoms and molecules) and describes them using
probability theory.
At the very beginning, in Ch. 1.4 “The Role of Energy”, the book [2] draws
attention to those random variables that obey conservation laws. The prime example
of such a variable is energy E. If we divide the system into two subsystems, the total
energy E is the sum of two parts: E = E1 + E2. On the other hand, the probability
distribution P(E) of energy E is the product of the two probability distributions:
P(E) = P(E1) P(E2). In other words, energy is additive, whereas probability is
multiplicative. The general solution of these two equations is the exponential function
P(E) ∝e−E/T , where T is a coeﬃcient called temperature. (The Boltzmann constant
is set to unity kB = 1, so T has the dimensionality of E.) It is known as the Boltzmann-
Gibbs distribution of energy in physics.
I was stunned that such a general result is derived seemingly from nothing, just
using the basics of probability theory. So, I thought this mathematical derivation
should be applicable to a much broader class of systems, which have nothing to do with
physics, as long as they are statistical ensembles and have a conserved variable. As a
prime example, I thought of the economy, which is surely a big statistical ensemble
with millions of interacting agents. But is there a conserved variable? Goods and
services, the main purpose of the economy, are clearly not conserved, because they
are produced and consumed. But in a monetary economy, goods and services are
exchanged for money. Ordinary economic agents can only receive and give money to
other agents, but are not permitted to “manufacture” money. (This would be criminal
counterfeiting.) In other words, the agents can grow apples on apple trees (so apples
are not conserved), but cannot grow money on “money trees”. Suppose an agent 1
with the initial money balance m1 transfers money ∆to agent 2 with the balance
m2 and receives apples in exchange. Agent 1 eats the apples and they disappear, but
the new money balances of the agents now are m′
1 = m1 −∆and m′
2 = m2 + ∆.
Clearly, money satisﬁes a local conservation law m′
1 + m′
2 = m1 + m2 in transactions
among agents. While conservation laws in physics follow from fundamental space-time
symmetries, conservation of money is the law of accounting.
So I concluded, by analogy with the derivation in [2], that the probability dis-
tribution P(m) of money m among the agents of an economic system in statistical
equilibrium should be given by the exponential function P(m) ∝e−m/Tm, where Tm
is the money temperature. The latter is equal to the average amount of money per
agent: Tm = ⟨m⟩=
R ∞
0
dm m P(m)/
R ∞
0
dm P(m) = M/N, where M is total money
and N is the number of agents. The exponential probability distribution P(m) implies
that there are few rich agents with high money balance and many poor agents with
low balance, so the distribution is highly unequal, even if the agents are statistically
equal. This is a shocking conclusion for social sciences, where inequality is usually
attributed to intrinsic diﬀerences between agents, but in a gas it results from prob-
abilistic collisions between identical molecules. Although I came to these conclusions
as a physics undergraduate, I waited for 20 years to get tenure before publishing this
idea in [3] with my student Adrian Dr˘agulescu, because I was not sure how my physics
colleagues would react to such a radical proposition.
Besides, I wanted to ﬁnish reading the remaining volumes of the Course of The-
oretical Physics. Relevantly, volume 10 Physical Kinetics [4] introduced me to the


--- Page 3 ---
Will be inserted by the editor
3
Boltzmann kinetic equation, which describes evolution of P(m) in time t,
dP(m)
dt
=
ZZ
{−f[m,m′]→[m−∆,m′+∆]P(m)P(m′)
(1)
+f[m−∆,m′+∆]→[m,m′]P(m −∆)P(m′ + ∆)} dm′ d∆.
Here f[m,m′]→[m−∆,m′+∆] is the probability of transferring money ∆from an agent
with money m to an agent with money m′ per unit time. This probability, multiplied
by the occupation numbers P(m) and P(m′), gives the rate of transitions from the
state [m, m′] to the state [m−∆, m′ + ∆]. The ﬁrst term in Eq. (1) gives the depopu-
lation rate of the state m. The second term in Eq. (1) describes the reversed process,
where the occupation number P(m) increases. When the two terms are equal, the
rates of direct and reversed transitions are equal, so the probability distribution is
stationary: dP(m)/dt = 0. This is called the principle of detailed balance.
In physics, the fundamental microscopic equations of motion obey the time-reversal
symmetry, so the probabilities of direct and reversed processes are exactly equal:
f[m,m′]→[m−∆,m′+∆] = f[m−∆,m′+∆]→[m,m′].
(2)
When Eq. (2) is satisﬁed, the detailed balance condition for Eq. (1) reduces to the
equation P(m)P(m′) = P(m −∆)P(m′ + ∆), because the factors f cancels out. The
general solution of this equation is again the exponential function P(m) ∝e−m/Tm,
i.e. the Boltzmann-Gibbs distribution is the stationary solution of the dynamical
Boltzmann kinetic equation (1). Notice that, while the transition probabilities (2) are
determined by the dynamical rules of the model, the equilibrium Boltzmann-Gibbs
distribution does not depend on the dynamical rules at all. Amazingly, it is possible to
ﬁnd the stationary distribution without knowing details of the dynamical rules (which
are not so clear in economics), as long as the symmetry condition (2) is satisﬁed.
This brings up the question whether dynamical rules for economic transactions
have the time-reversal symmetry. In physics, time-reversal invariance is a fundamental
symmetry, but, in economics, it is not necessarily the case. As an example of a time-
reversible operation, suppose I pay 5 dollars to buy apples and then receive 5 dollars
for selling oranges from my farm, so my balance returns to the initial value. These two
transactions correspond to the left and right sides of Eq. (2) with ∆= 5. Moreover, if
f(∆) in Eq. (2) depends only on ∆, but not on m and m′ (or depends only on m+m′),
then the probabilities of money ﬂow in both directions are equal, and time-reversal
symmetry is satisﬁed. As an example of a non-time-reversible operation, suppose I
pay 5% of my money balance, i.e. ∆= 0.05 m, to buy apples, and then another
agent pays me 5% of her money balance, i.e. ∆′ = 0.05 m′, for oranges from my
farm. Obviously, my balance does not return to the initial value, and the left and
right terms in Eq. (2) are not equal. The ﬁrst process is additive, because ∆does not
depend on m, whereas the second process is multiplicative, because ∆is a percentage
of m. Models of the second kind were introduced in econophysics literature in [5,6]
and earlier in sociology [7]. The probability distribution of money P(m) in these
models was found to be Gamma-like, i.e. not exponential, although its high-end tail
is still exponential. So, despite the elegant argument presented in [2], conservation of
energy or money is not, by itself, suﬃcient to produce the exponential distribution,
but microscopic time-reversal symmetry is suﬃcient, as explained in [4]. Whether
additive, multiplicative, or mixed models are appropriate for economics is subject to
debate, not to be pursued here, but discussed in some detail in reviews [8,9].
If the transaction amounts ∆are small, the integral Boltzmann equation (1) for
the probability distribution P(m, t) can be reduced to the partial diﬀerential Fokker-


--- Page 4 ---
4
Will be inserted by the editor
Planck equation [4], also known as the Kolmogorov forward equation,
∂P
∂t =
∂
∂m

AP + ∂(BP)
∂m

,
A = −⟨∆⟩
dt ,
B = ⟨∆2⟩
2dt .
(3)
The coeﬃcients A and B, known as the drift and diﬀusion, are the ﬁrst and second
moments of money balance changes ∆per time increment dt. Notice that Eq. (3) is
linear with respect to P(m, t), whereas Eq. (1) is nonlinear. A stationary solution
∂tP = 0 of Eq. (3) is obtained by setting the probability ﬂux, which is the expression
in the square brackets, to zero. For an additive process, the coeﬃcients A and B
are constants independent of m, so the stationary distribution is again exponential
P(m) ∝e−m/Tm. Here the money temperature Tm = B/A is expressed in terms
of B and A similarly to the Einstein relation between temperature, diﬀusion, and
mobility. A well-known example in physics is the barometric distribution of gas density
P(z) ∝e−µgz/T versus height z in the presence of gravity, where µ is the mass of a
molecule, g is the gravitational acceleration, and µgz is the gravitational energy of
a molecule. The competition between downward drift due to gravity and spreading
around due to diﬀusion results in the stationary exponential distribution P(z). It
represents statistical equilibrium as opposed to mechanical one, where two forces
acting on an object balance each other. Much of the current thinking in economics
revolves around mechanical equilibrium between supply and demand, but the concept
of statistical equilibrium is largely unfamiliar to most economists.
Besides tenure, another important factor that nudged me to proceed with the
paper [3] was invention of the term econophysics by Eugene Stanley [10] in a discussion
with Bikas Chakrabarti at the conference Dynamics of Complex Systems in Kolkata
in 1995 [11]. Although some physicists dabbled in economics before (see review [8]),
the new term econophysics prompted consolidation and explosive growth of research
by physicists this area. However, the road was very bumpy at the beginning.
The paper [3] was originally submitted to Physical Review Letters. It was re-
jected based on a negative referee report stating that it is known since the days of
Vilfredo Pareto that distributions in economics are power laws and are not exponen-
tial. Interestingly, the argument was empirical, rather than theoretical, so we decided
to re-examine empirical data. We did not succeed in ﬁnding data on distribution of
money balances, but found plenty of data on income distribution from several govern-
ment agencies. When we plotted the data from the U.S. Census Bureau in log-linear
scale, the data points fell on a straight line, conﬁrming the exponential law, which we
reported in [12]. Then, using the data from the U.S. tax agency, the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS), extending to much higher incomes that the Census data, we found
that the high end of the distribution does follow the Pareto power law, whereas the
majority of population with lower incomes is described by the exponential law [13].
Thus, the whole income distribution can be decomposed into the lower class with an
exponential distribution and the upper class with a power law, indicating the two-
class structure of the society [14]. We conﬁrmed these results by an extensive analysis
of income data for about 20 years from the IRS [15]. This paper was also originally
submitted to Physical Review Letters and received generally positive referee reports,
but was still rejected on the grounds that “it is not physics”. Nevertheless, four years
later, Reviews of Modern Physics accepted the paper [8], albeit not without a ﬁght
with referees. In this paper and in [16], we proposed a uniﬁed description of the
power-law and exponential classes in income distribution based on the Fokker-Planck
equation (3) with co-existing additive and multiplicative stochastic processes.
Reaction to these studies from mainstream economists was not enthusiastic, to put
it mildly. At a conference lunch in Aix-en-Provence in 2002, a distinguished professor
of economics from Princeton University told me: “Inequality is not something we are


--- Page 5 ---
Will be inserted by the editor
5
interested in economics”! But after the big ﬁnancial crisis of 2008, the existence of the
two social classes, 99% vs. 1%, became widely recognized, and debate on inequality
took central stage, culminating in the rock-star reception of Piketty’s book [17]. In
2014, the Science magazine dedicated a special issue to The Science of Inequality,
where the physics-inspired theory of inequality was covered in the article [18].
In physics, a very important concept in dealing with statistical distributions is en-
tropy. Ludwig Boltzmann proved in the 19th century that the exponential distribution
of energy in statistical equilibrium can be derived from the principle of maximal en-
tropy, subject to the constraint of a ﬁxed total energy in the system. According to
Boltzmann, the entropy S = ln W is the logarithm of the multiplicity W, which is
the number of combinatorial ways for distributing the total energy E (or money M)
among the molecules in a gas (or agents in the economy). For example, there is only
one way to divide E or M equally among N molecules or agents: mi = M/N, so
W = 1 and S = 0. In contrast, in unequal distribution, one agent may have a balance
m1 = 5 and another agent m2 = 10, or, conversely, their balances may be m1 = 10
and m2 = 5, so the same overall distribution can be obtained in several diﬀerent
ways. Thus, W > 1 and S > 0 for unequal distribution, and the maximal values of W
and S are achieved for the exponential distribution. It follows from the kinetic equa-
tion (1), as proven by Boltzmann, that the entropy S increases monotonously in time
until it reaches the maximal value [4]. So, the exponential distribution of money is a
consequence of the maximal entropy principle [19], which is the basis of the second
law of thermodynamics. This principle can be also applied to global inequality, as
measured by energy consumption per capita in diﬀerent countries [16]. Analysis [20]
of the data from the U.S. Energy Information Agency (EIA) shows that, in the last 30
years, global energy inequality has been decreasing from a very unequal distribution
between developed and developing countries toward the more equal exponential dis-
tribution, in agreement with the maximal entropy principle. In this approach, entropy
saturation at the exponential distribution is responsible for the current slow-down of
the global economic activity, manifestations of which are recognized as the “global
economic ice age” [21] or “secular stagnation” [22]. The mechanism is similar to the
“thermal death of the Universe” widely discussed in physics in the 19th century.
2 Debate about money
Having discussed statistical distribution and inequality in an economic ensemble,
now I would like to focus on the conservation law of money, which initially motivated
this study. Generally, conservation laws play very important role in physics, e.g. by
imposing constraints that ensure stability of a system, but economics literature pays
less attention to them. Every time I give a talk and describe conservation of money in
transactions among agents, somebody exclaims: “But money is not conserved!” Then
I ask how money is not conserved and receive all kinds of answers. So, in the second
part of the paper, I examine various mechanisms for putative non-conservation of
money, after a discussion of the nature of money. As a reference, I use three Chapters
“Money and Banking”, “How Banks Create Money”, and “The Federal Reserve Banks
and Monetary Policy” from the fairly standard undergraduate economics textbook
[23]. This discussion also addresses confusion in econophysics literature between the
concepts of money and wealth.
2.1 The nature of money, conservation law, and boundary conditions
First, one may ask why do we need to use money. After all, the ultimate purpose of
the economy is production of goods and services. In principle, barter can be used for


--- Page 6 ---
6
Will be inserted by the editor
a direct exchange of, say, apples for oranges between two agents. However, barter is
increasingly impractical for a cyclic exchange, say, of apples, oranges, and cherries
among three agents and for higher-order exchanges. Thus, a natural idea is to intro-
duce digital tokens, called money, so that agent 1 receives money (rather than physical
products) in exchange for delivering apples to agent 2. Some time later, agent 1 gives
money to agent 3 and receives oranges in exchange. The net result is that agent 1
exchanged apples for oranges, but not necessarily with the same agent, as in barter.
This makes the economy much more ﬂexible than in barter, where ﬂow of goods must
be balanced on pairwise basis. Now an agent only needs to balance a contribution of
apples to the society as a whole, for which the agent is paid money, with the beneﬁt
of receiving oranges from the society, for which the agent pays money.
This consideration shows that money is a digital accounting tool needed to prevent
free riding. Money is a digital token (meaning it is expressed as a number) indicating
how much an agent contributed to the society, which entitles the agent to receive
a commensurate beneﬁt from the society. If such a record is not maintained, agents
would engage in free riding, i.e. they would receive beneﬁts from the society (from the
other agents) without contributing to the society in return, which would quickly ruin
economic relations. Money is not needed for pairwise exchanges of goods in barter,
but a universally accepted digital tool, i.e. money, is necessary to enable many-body
exchanges of goods in the ensemble of agents who don’t even know each other.
Since the purpose of money is to prevent free riding, money must necessarily be
conserved. It means that agents should be not be able to manufacture (or destroy) the
digital money tokens on their own (unlike apples), but should only receive them from
and give them to other agents. Otherwise, the agents would manufacture the digital
money tokens and use them to receive beneﬁts from the society without contributing
goods and services in return, which is free riding. So, conservation of money is not
a peculiar artifact, but the fundamental principle of accounting on which money
functionality is based. Curiously, conservation of money is not mentioned explicitly
in economic textbooks [23], although the three commonly stated properties of money:
medium of exchange, measure of value, and store of value, only make sense only if
money is conserved. Indeed, medium of exchange means that money is exchanged for
goods in transaction among agents, the value of goods is measured by the money paid
for them, and storing money entitles to receive future beneﬁts. These feature would
become meaningless, if the agents were able to manufacture money on their own.
But if the agents cannot manufacture money, how would money be brought into
the system? Instead of going through the history of various rare and scarce objects
(notably gold) serving as money, let us focus on the present-day ﬁat money, which
are, essentially, digital accounts declared to be money. As an example, let us discuss
a Local Exchange Trading System (LETS) [24], as a bottom-up way to create a
monetary system. LETS participants start with zero initial balances ˜mi = 0. When
agent 1 provides a service to agent 2, their balances increase and decrease by the
same amount: ˜m′
1 = +∆and ˜m′
2 = −∆. So, the conservation law is satisﬁed in the
algebraic sense: ˜m1 + ˜m2 = 0 = ˜m′
1 + ˜m′
2. As the agents continue trading, their
balances grow in positive and negative directions starting from zero so that ⟨˜m⟩= 0,
and it looks like this system does not require initial creation of money.
However, the conservation law by itself does not prevent free riding. Some agents
i can accumulate unlimited negative balances ˜mi < 0 by receiving services and not
contributing in return. This can be prevented by imposing a boundary condition on
the negative side, i.e. by demanding that ˜mmin < ˜mi, where ˜mmin < 0. An agent whose
balance reached ˜mmin is not permitted to receive further services until contributing
services and, thus, increasing the balance above ˜mmin. One may ask whether a similar
boundary condition should be imposed on positive balances: ˜mi < ˜mmax with ˜mmax >


--- Page 7 ---
Will be inserted by the editor
7
0. If the boundary conditions are symmetric ˜mmin = −˜mmax, then it is obvious that
the distribution of money P( ˜m) would be symmetric around zero: P( ˜m) = P(−˜m).
However, one may argue against imposing the upper boundary condition ˜mmax.
Why stop agents from contributing more to the society, which results in the increase
of their positive money balances? An agent can be proud of a high positive balance,
which conﬁrms great contribution to the society (the opposite of free riding). So, sup-
pose the upper limit is not imposed, i.e. ˜mmax = ∞. Now the boundary conditions
are asymmetric, and, obviously, P( ˜m) would be also asymmetric. At this point, LETS
coordinators may realize that this asymmetric system can be simpliﬁed by shifting all
money balances to introduce new money mi = ˜mi −˜mmin. It is equivalent to giving
each agent the positive amount −˜mmin. Now the boundary condition shifts to zero, so
the new money must be positive mi > 0 with the mean ⟨m⟩= | ˜mmin| = M/N = Tm,
which we called the money temperature in Sec. 1. LETS coordinators may also realize
that the new money mi could have been introduced from the beginning by allocating
the equal initial balances mi = M/N to all agents and imposing the boundary condi-
tion mi > 0 to prevent free riding. Since money m is positive, it can also implemented
using symbolic physical objects such as gold, but it would have been diﬃcult to im-
plement “negative gold” for ˜m. In practice, positive ﬁat money m on the national
scale is usually created in a top-down manner by the central monetary authority of
the state, as discussed in Sec. 2.4 and emphasized by the Modern Monetary Theory
(MMT) [25,26,27].
If the agents are given the equal initial money balances, would their balances
stay approximately equal, once they start trading? One might naively expect that
the answer is positive, given that all agents are treated equally in a statistical sense.
However, agent-based computer simulations [28] show that the answer is actually
negative. In a simple model where ∆= 1 for each transaction [28], the initial delta-
function distribution P0(m) = δm,⟨m⟩starts broadening in a Gaussian manner, then
becomes asymmetric because of probability accumulation at the boundary m = 0, and
ﬁnally attains the stationary exponential form P(m) ∝e−m/Tm. This example teaches
several lessons. First, the initial state of perfect equality is totally unstable once
trading starts. As explained in Sec. 1, the state of perfect equality has zero entropy, so
the system spontaneously evolves toward unequal state with higher entropy. Second,
the lower boundary condition m > 0 is absolutely crucial for achieving a stationary
probability distribution P(m). If the boundary condition m > 0 were not imposed
(i.e. negative money balances and free riding were permitted), then the system would
never achieve any equilibrium, and P(m) would never stabilize. Some agents would
keep accumulating negative money balances for receiving services from other agents,
who would keep accumulating positive money balances. This situation looks similar
to the present-day imbalances in international trade, e.g. between USA and China,
Germany and the rest of Europe, etc. The laissez-faire school of economics argues
that, if all restrictions and regulations are removed, the economy would come to a
natural equilibrium and should be left there. However, this argument is misleading
because an equilibrium cannot be achieved without imposing boundary conditions, i.e.
regulations.
The situation where the agents are given the equal initial money balances may
look like an artiﬁcial exercise, but it actually happened in history. A senior physics
colleague from Germany told me that, after the World War II, when German econ-
omy was completely destroyed, the Allied Powers allocated an equal amount of new
money to each German citizen in order to restart the economy. Needless to say that
the distribution of money in Germany now is not equal, so the inequality devel-
oped spontaneously out of the initially equal state. Another example is the Russian
revolution of 1917, which divided land equally among peasants. However, forced con-
ﬁscation of agricultural products by the Bolshevik government led to famine, so in


--- Page 8 ---
8
Will be inserted by the editor
1921 Vladimir Lenin introduced the New Economic Policy (NEP) [29] permitting
limited market relations. As a result, inequality started to develop among peasants
via land acquisition by richer kulaki from poorer batraki. In this case, inequality de-
veloped by redistribution of a positive conserved physical resource (land) rather than
conserved digital variable (money), but mathematically these problems are the same.
Joseph Stalin terminated NEP in 1928 and replaced individual land ownership with
collective farms.
2.2 Distinction between physical and monetary layers of the economy
The ﬂow of goods and money in the monetary economy can be decomposed into two
circuits or layers. The physical layer includes production, transfer, and consumption
of physical objects, goods, and services. This layer is ultimately governed by physical
laws and constraints, including energy, natural resources, environment, etc. Objects
at the physical layer (goods and services) are generally not conserved. In contrast,
the monetary layer represents ﬂow of money among the agents in exchange for goods
and services. As argued in Sec. 2.1, money is an accounting tool represented by
pure numbers, which are nothing but digital bits of information. Thus, the monetary
layer is the informational layer of the economy, in contrast to the physical layer.
Any information must have some physical carrier (e.g. paper banknotes, gold coins,
or magnetic records on computer hard drives), but physical nature of the carrier is
irrelevant, and information is subject to its own laws (e.g. the laws of accounting).
The monetary layer also conveys information to the agents, guiding them toward
optimal (in an ideal case) allocation of labor and resources. Many people want to
be artists and musicians, but society needs plumbers and garbage collectors a lot
more to function eﬀectively. So, ideally, the agents would ﬁnd more money earning
opportunities in the areas of dire societal need. The no-free-riding constraint of money
imposes discipline and forces the agents to do what society needs, not necessarily what
they like.
The two layers are coupled, because physical goods and digital money ﬂow in
the opposite directions in transactions between agents. But it is very important to
realize that the objects belonging to diﬀerent layers cannot be converted into each
other. An (imperfect) analogy in physics is with fermions (e.g. electrons) and bosons
(e.g. photons), which interact, but cannot be converted into each other. A failure to
distinguish between the two fundamentally diﬀerent layers is pervasive in economics
and among general public. It originates from misinterpretation of what happens when
an agent spends digital money to acquire a physical product. From an individual
point of view, money disappears and the product appears, so it looks like money is
transformed into the product. However, this is actually a transaction between two
agents, so money does not disappear, but is transferred to another agent, so it is
conserved, and the product arrives from that agent in counterﬂow of money and
goods. The failure to make this simple observation leads to various fallacies.
Fallacy #1: Money grows as a result of investment
Once the chair of the economics department of the University of California at Santa
Barbara came to my colloquium at the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics. He
objected to conservation of money, so I asked for an example (the audio-video record
of this conversation is available online [30]). He proposed that I invest my money:
spend $100 to buy gold, then sell gold a year later for $200, and, voila, my money
has increased, so it is not conserved. My response was that it is necessary to consider


--- Page 9 ---
Will be inserted by the editor
9
all parties involved in these transactions. Besides me, agent 1, there was also agent
2 who gave me gold and took my $100. Then, there was agent 3 who gave me $200
in exchange for gold. Overall, it was a three-body transfer of money mediated by
counterﬂow of gold at the physical layer, and the sum of money balances of all three
agents did not change, m1 + m2 + m3 = const = $300. So, the conservation law of
money is satisﬁed in investment.
The same fallacy is perpetuated on a much grander scale in pension funds invest-
ments aﬀecting millions of people. When I became a faculty member at the University
of Maryland in 1993, I signed up for a 401(k) pension fund. A representative recom-
mended me to buy stocks now, so that I would receive a lot more money by selling
them later, when I am ready to retire. I asked where this extra money would come
from to pay the higher price for my stocks. He did not have better answers than “ev-
erybody invests in stock market, because it is such a great thing” and “historically,
stocks outperform everything else”. (Later I heard similar mantra “prices of houses
never decrease”.) These arguments did not satisfy my analytical mind, so he recom-
mended me to read the book [31]. The arguments in the book based on demographics
did make sense. The demographic tsunami wave of baby boomers progressively reach-
ing the age of 45 and massively “saving” money for retirement by investing in stocks
would create a stock market bubble starting from 1995. It was predicted in the book
published in 1993, as reﬂected by its title [31]. Some 15 years later, reaching the age
around 60, the baby boomers would start to retire and sell their investments, causing
the market to crash. On page 16, the book says “the next great depression will be
from 2008 to 2023”. This is a stunning prediction of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis published
15 years in advance. So, the baby boomers would be buying stocks during the bubble
of late 1990s at high prices and selling them after the market crash of 2008 at low
prices, which is the opposite of good investment. Only the massive infusion of several
trillion dollars by the Federal Reserve stopped ﬁnancial system and stock market from
collapse after 2008, but it remains to be seen what will happen next. But the answer
to my question seems to be that the money, hopefully, would come from the Fed.
Fallacy #2: Money grows as a result of production
When people hear about conservation of money, they often respond along the fol-
lowing lines. We work very hard to make our lives better, so our collective wealth
increases in time as a result of production, and, since money is some sort of measure
of wealth, money should increase too. This is a typical failure to distinguish between
physical and monetary layers. Undoubtedly, physical capacity, as measured by the
number of cars, homes, computers, etc., increases as a result of production. However,
this expansion of the physical layer does not translate directly into expansion of the
monetary layer, because these layers have diﬀerent nature and follow diﬀerent rules.
For example, my ﬁrst personal computer purchased in late 1980s had disk capacity
of 20 MegaBytes. Today, a typical computer can easily have disk capacity of 2 Ter-
aBytes. So, the disk storage capacity has increased by the factor of 105. Yet, today’s
computer is cheaper than my ﬁrst computer, even without correction for inﬂation.
So, the humongous increase of physical storage capacity did not increase monetary
value of a computer at all. Instead, the price of storage per MegaByte has decreased
by the factor of 10−5, and the annual dollar revenue of magnetic recording industry
has been ﬂat for 30 years. This kind of argument is often brought up by the monetary
school of economics [23].
Another example of this fallacy can be seen in the debate about Greek debt. It
is often said that productivity in Greece is too low, and, if only Greece managed to
increase production, then it would have surely been able to pay its debt. Suppose


--- Page 10 ---
10
Will be inserted by the editor
Greece specializes in growing oranges and, by working very hard, doubles production,
i.e. expands its physical layer. The problem, however, is that the creditors of Greece
do not want the debt to be paid in oranges; they want it to be paid in monetary units,
dollars or euros. So, Greece would need to ﬁnd other parties who have enough money
and are willing to pay this money for oranges, and that is a problem. Any salesman
can tell that sale of a product is often more diﬃcult than production.
Fallacy #3: Economic models without money
Let us explore the analogy between two layers of the economy and fermions/bosons in
physics a bit further. In physics, we can “integrate out” photons, i.e. eliminate them
as mediators, and obtain direct Coulomb interaction between electron. Alternatively,
we can “integrate out” electrons and describe an electronic material as an eﬀective
medium for propagation of photons.
In economics, we can “integrate out” money, i.e. eliminate them as intermediate
steps, and reduce an economic model to direct exchanges of physical products de-
scribed by Leontief-style input-output matrices. This approach is quite popular in
economics, but there is a problem with such models without money. Most economic
crises in recent memory were crises of the monetary layer, not the physical layer. If
money is eliminated from a model, under the assumption of ideal functioning of mon-
etary system, then, as a matter of principe, such a model cannot predict, describe,
and explain monetary crises of the economy.
Alternatively, we can “integrate out” products and reduce a model to money
transfers among agents. This is the approach described in Sec. 1. Even though such
model only keeps track of money movements, it is assumed that there is corresponding
counterﬂow of products, which is not described explicitly.
2.3 Money vs. wealth
As explained above, money and physical products belong to diﬀerent layers of the
economy. However, they are often combined into a single variable w called wealth. The
wealth wi of an agent i is deﬁned as wi = mi + P
α pαv(α)
i
, where pα is the monetary
price per unit volume (per item) of the product α, and v(α)
i
is the volume (the number
of items) of this product owned by the agent i. The prices pα are conversion coeﬃcients
from physical to monetary units.
Because the concept of wealth combines two fundamentally diﬀerent layers, not
surprisingly there are various problems with this concept. Let us consider wealth
change in the example of investment in gold. The total initial wealth in the system,
$400, is the sum of the total money $300 owned by the three agents and the monetary
value of gold, $100, as observed in the transaction between agents 1 and 2. However,
the ﬁnal wealth, $500, is greater, because the higher price of $200 was observed
in the transaction between agents 1 and 3. It is somewhat paradoxical that, while
the amounts of money and gold (as measured by weight) have not changed, the
total wealth has increased. In the ﬁrst transaction between agents 1 and 2, w1 and
w2 did not change, because each of them exchanged money/gold for the equivalent
amount of gold/money worth of $100. Similarly, w1 and w3 did not change in the
second transaction worth of $200. Apparently, the wealth w1 of agent 1 changed
between the ﬁrst and second transactions, when the price of gold increases from $100
to $200, because the agents changed their opinion how valuable is gold. In conclusion,
wealth does not change in transactions, but changes between transactions, either
because of price change in pα or volume change in v(α)
i
due to physical production (or


--- Page 11 ---
Will be inserted by the editor
11
consumption). Thus, fallacies #1 and #2 do not apply to wealth: wealth can change
as a result of investment (due to price change) or production (due to volume change).
However, this brings us to the next fallacy.
Fallacy #4: Kinetic models of wealth transfer (as opposed to money transfer)
Here I would like to criticize my fellow econophysicists. As explained in Sec. 1, a
kinetic gas-like model with collisions/transactions between agents was introduced in
[3] as a model of money transfers among agents (in exchange for goods and services
not speciﬁed explicitly). However, many other econophysics papers (see reviews [8,9])
apply similar kinetic models to conservative wealth transfer between agents using the
rules w′
i = wi −∆and w′
j = wj +∆. Already the earlier paper [5] talked about wealth
and assets transfers, but money was not mentioned. Although the models for transfer
of m or w are mathematically the same, there is important conceptual diﬀerence
between wealth and money. As explained above, the wealth wi of an agent i does not
change in a transaction, because money is exchanged for goods of equivalent value,
which means that ∆= 0 in all transactions. On the other hand, wealth does change
between transactions due to price changes or production, which are not included in
these models, so the total wealth is actually not conserved, but these models are
conservative. In my opinion, the terminology in these models should be changed from
wealth to money. Otherwise, the word “wealth” makes them conceptually confusing
and misleading. Some papers argue that wealth transfer between two agents happens
due to deceit and stupidity (resulting in wrong price paid) or robbery and theft
(forceful or concealed seizure of property). Although such incidents do happen, they
play a minor role relative to regular market transactions in an orderly society.
2.4 Exogenous money creation by the state
As discussed in Sec. 2.1 and argued by MMT [25], a sovereign state has the authority
to issue ﬁat money from scratch. Obviously, such emission (“printing”) of new money
by the state changes the total amount of money M in circulation, so it is a mechanism
for non-conservation. However, the terminology needs further reﬁnement here. When
discussing conservation laws in physics, it is necessary to draw a boundary to deﬁne a
system. Then a conservation law, e.g. of energy, says that the total energy inside the
system cannot change due to any processes inside the system and can only change due
to energy transfer across the boundary. For example, if we choose the Earth as the
system, its total energy can only increase due to energy ﬂux from the Sun and decrease
due to radiation into space. Although the energy of the Earth may change if the two
ﬂuxes are not equal, this example is completely consistent with the conservation law
in physics. Similarly, we can deﬁne the regular economic system as consisting of all
private agents of the economy, whereas the state is outside the system. As in the
Earth example and following MMT [25], “horizontal” transactions among the agents
within the system do not change total money, but, in “vertical” transactions between
the system and the state, new money ﬂows across the boundary into the system.
Why would the state want or need to inject new money into the system? One
reason, out of many, is population growth. If population N grows while money M is
constant, the money per capita (the money temperature) Tm = M/N would decrease.
Since money becomes scarcer on per capita basis, its buying power would increase,
so prices would decrease, which is called deﬂation. Once the agents realize that prices
are decreasing, they would tend to hoard money, because they can buy more products
for the same money in the future. Hoarding would decrease the amount of money in


--- Page 12 ---
12
Will be inserted by the editor
circulation, which would further exacerbate deﬂation and may suﬀocate the economy.
So, arguably, the state should increase M, at least, in proportion to N to prevent Tm
from decreasing. The monetary school of economics [23] proposed a monetary rule
of steady money injection on a regular schedule, arguing that a moderate inﬂation
would stimulate spending and prevent money hoarding.
One may also argue that the new, younger generation is “entitled” to the same
amount of money per capita as the previous, older generations. However, it is not a
good idea just to give lump sums of money to young people. It is better to follow the
principle that money must be earned by work. So, the best way for the state to inject
new money is by funding public infrastructure projects for the beneﬁt of the whole
society. These projects can be also paid by taxes collected from the population. But
a proportion of taxes and new money for public infrastructure funding is a technical
and practical matter, not a dogma like the “balanced government budget”.
The prime example of public infrastructure is military spending. It is hard to
assess consumer value of the enormously expensive intercontinental ballistic missiles,
which nobody ever wants to use. Only the government can pay for them, and the
military-industrial complex has been the prime driver of the American economy for
many years, creating various high technologies along the way. Arguably, the greatest
challenge for the humankind in the 21st century is an orderly transition from fossil
fuels to renewable energy, so the state should actively fund such a transition. Given
that trillions of dollars of new money have been created in recent memory to bail out
ﬁnancial institutions and to pay for wars, the laments that “there is not enough money
in the budgets to pay for renewable energy” or “renewable energy is not aﬀordable
because it is too expensive” sound quite ridiculous.
Within the state, the government, which is the executive branch, is usually sep-
arated from the central bank, which has monetary authority. Thus, the government
cannot issue new money on its own and can only raise money for its budget by col-
lecting taxes and fees or by borrowing, e.g. by issuing treasury bonds. Private agents
would give their money to the government in exchange for treasury bonds, and the
government would use this money to pay for public projects. Thus, government bor-
rowing from the agents does not change the total money in the system. At the bond
maturity date, a reverse process is supposed to happen. The government would need
to collect enough taxes and fees to pay money back to bond holders. However, the
government budget in USA is almost always in deﬁcit, so the Department of the Trea-
sury keeps issuing new bonds to pay back the earlier ones. New money is injected
into the system when the Federal Reserve (the central bank) buys the treasury bonds.
The whole process looks like a charade. The Federal Reserve is not permitted to buy
bonds directly from the Treasury and can only buy then on the open market from
commercial banks, thus producing the same net outcome, but paying handsome fees
to the banks for “intermediation”. Moreover, a footnote in [23, p. 267] explains that
the Treasury pays interest on the bonds to the Fed; the Fed records these payments
as “proﬁt” and then, being a non-proﬁt public agency, returns them to the Treasury,
which records them as “revenue”! The net result is that the treasury bonds held by
the Fed represent an interest-free loan to the Treasury that never has to be paid back.
Thus, the debt from the Treasury to the Fed should be subtracted and erased from
the net government debt [32]. The recent massive purchase of the treasury bonds
by the Fed is monetization of the government debt and injection of new money into
the system. It is very unlikely that the Fed will ever sell these bonds, thus removing
money from the system. Moreover, it is likely that the Fed will need to buy further
massive amounts of treasury bonds from the Social Security Administration (SSA)
to enable retirement payments for the baby boomer demographic wave. The SSA will
need a bailout by the Fed, because it spent all revenue from social security taxes to
buy treasury bonds, thus funding operating budget of the government. Somebody has


--- Page 13 ---
Will be inserted by the editor
13
to pay cash for these bonds, most likely the Fed, because the government in perpetual
deﬁcit cannot do that. Arguably, one reason for the prolonged recession in Europe is
resistance by the European Central Bank to monetize government debt.
In a typical manner of checks and balances in USA, new money can be injected only
upon action and consent of three state bodies. The executing branch (the government)
has to propose a deﬁcit budget and request bond issuance, the legislative branch (the
Congress) has to approve this request, and the Fed has to buy these bonds. Lately,
the three bodies often acted without coordination and in opposite directions. The
Congress pressed for austerity, demanding budget cuts and refusing to raise debt
ceiling for the Treasury, whereas the Fed pursued easy money policy and bought a
lot of treasury bonds. Due to the massive injection of new money, one would expect
to see signiﬁcant inﬂation, for which there are many examples in countries around
the world. Yet the consumer price index in USA has not changed much. One possible
explanation is globalization of the world economy [32]. As a legacy of the Bretton
Woods agreements, the American dollar is the world reserve currency, which is used
formally or informally in many countries. So, the new money injected by the Fed
do not necessarily stay within USA, but spread around the world by the globalized
ﬁnancial system. Thus, it would be more appropriate to consider the huge global
population as the number of agents N, rather than the population of USA. In the past,
when national economies were more closed, emission of money by a national central
bank was likely to cause inﬂation. But in the modern globalized world, emission of
money by the Federal Reserve stimulates a Turkish economic bubble [33] more than
the American economy.
2.5 Debt in peer-to-peer lending
A widely held opinion is that debt has something to do with money creation. So,
we examine the question of debt in the rest of the paper. The “rich” agents who
accumulated high money balances, well above their customary level of consumption,
may not know what to do with this money, but would not want to just give it away.
Instead, they may decide to lend this money temporarily to other, “poor” agents,
who have low or zero money balances. First, let us examine such peer-to-peer lending
without banks.
Fallacy #5: Money grows as a result of peer-to-peer lending
Agent 1 would give money ∆to agent 2 in exchange for a promissory note (an IOU),
where agent 2 promises to return the money ∆back to agent 1 at a speciﬁed time
in the future, with an extra monetary interest δ∆. Nominally, this transaction looks
similar to what was considered at the beginning of the paper. The money balances of
the agents change as m′
1 = m1 −∆and m′
2 = m2 + ∆in exchange for the ﬁnancial
asset (the IOU), rather than physical goods. The total money is conserved, because
agent 1 does not have money ∆while agent 2 has it, and the IOU does not circulate,
because it is a personal agreement between two agents.
Fallacy #6: Money grows as a result of interest
In order to return the principal ∆with the interest δ∆to agent 1, agent 2 has to
obtain this money from other agents. As in the example of investment in gold, the
balance of agent 1 would increase to m′′
1 = m1 + δ∆after repayment of debt with
interest, but the increase δ∆has to come from other agents in the system. So, interest
on debt does not increase total money and does not violate conservation law of money.


--- Page 14 ---
14
Will be inserted by the editor
Fallacy #7: Money is debt
Superﬁcially, the act of borrowing looks somewhat similar to the positive-negative
pair creation in LETS discussed in Sec. 2.1. Agent 1 delivered goods to agent 2, and
their balances became ˜m′
1 = +∆and ˜m′
2 = −∆. The negative balance of agent 2
looks like debt, because it implies a promise to deliver equivalent goods to agent 1
sometimes in the future, with cancellation of the balances upon delivery. However,
money and debt are not the same thing, because they have important diﬀerences:
– Debt creates a “string” (or a “chain”) connecting the two agents until the debt is
repaid. In contrast, a money transaction is ﬁnal, and the agents have no further
obligations or connections, once goods are delivered and money paid.
– Debt is personal, whereas money is anonymous. The names of agents 1 and 2 are
written in the IOU agreement between them, but not on dollar bills.
– Debt has a due date for repayment, whereas money has no time stamp.
– There are legal penalties for not repaying debt, but no such things for money.
– Debt usually carries interest, but there is no such thing for money.
In short, debt is a promise to pay money, but not money itself. For example, suppose
the agents use bitcoins as their monetary tokens. They can still create a system of
lending and borrowing on top of their monetary system. An agent 1 would transfer
bitcoin to agent 2 in exchange for an IOU, where agent 2 promises to return bitcoin
to agent 1 at a speciﬁed time, possibly with extra bitcoin interest. Thus, lending and
borrowing can be thought of as the third, promissory, layer of the economy, on top
of the monetary level, where the actual money moves.
2.6 Debt as particle-antiparticle pair creation
Let us consider debt from the point of view of ﬁnancial wealth (net worth) ˜w. Let
us deﬁne the latter as the sum ˜wi = mi + di of money and money obligations, i.e.
debt. Here di = P
j dij, where dij represents the debt owed by agent j to agent i,
and the matrix is antisymmetric: dji = −dij. Positive di > 0 means that other agents
owe debt to agent i, and negative di < 0 means that agent i owes debt to them.
Suppose agent 1 has zero initial money balance m1 = ˜w1 = 0 and then borrows
the amount ∆from agent 2, whose initial money balance is m2 = ˜w2. After the
transaction, agent 1 has money m′
1 = +∆and debt obligation d′
1 = −∆, but the
net worth is still zero ˜w′
1 = +∆−∆= 0. Net worth of agent 2 also remains the
same: ˜w′
2 = m′
2 + d′
2 = m2 −∆+ ∆= ˜w2. Thus, borrowing looks similar to particle-
antiparticle (e.g. electron-positron) pair creation in physics with net zero electric
change. The act of borrowing does not change net worth of an agent, but allows it to
become negative by removing the boundary condition. Indeed, after agent 1 spends
some of the money m′
1 = +∆to buy goods and services from other agents, the balance
becomes negative w′′
1 < 0, because the debt obligation d′
1 = −∆stays with the agent.
Fallacy #8: Debt stabilizes by itself
Suppose the agent-based simulation [28] described at the end of Sec. 2.1 is repeated
for net worth ˜w instead of money m, starting from the equal money balances and no
debt. Now, when the agents need to buy goods or services, but do not have enough
money, they can borrow money from other agents by issuing debt obligations. As a
limiting case, suppose there is no restriction on debt. Then the initial delta-function
distribution P0( ˜w) = δ ˜
w,⟨m⟩would keep broadening in a Gaussian manner and would


--- Page 15 ---
Will be inserted by the editor
15
never stabilize, because negative balances are now permitted, and the boundary con-
dition at ˜w = 0 is removed. Some agents would have increasingly negative balances
due to accumulation of debt, and other agents have increasingly positive balances by
counting the debt owed to them as an asset, while the total net worth in the system ˜W
remains constant. The entropy S of the distribution P( ˜w) would increase indeﬁnitely
without saturation. The increase of entropy indicates that the growth of debt is an
irreversible process, similar to diﬀusion. Once debt is created, it cannot be paid back
for the whole ensemble, although each individual agent has a non-zero probability
to pay back the debt. In conclusion, debt does not stabilize by itself, unless a debt
restriction is imposed, and there is no such thing as equilibrium debt.
Fallacy #9: Interest stabilizes debt
If interest is introduced in the above consideration, it would further destabilize the
system. Negative balances would become more negative, and positive balances more
positive, so the positive and negative parts of the probability distribution P( ˜w) would
diverge (rather than converge) even faster. So, interest accrual, by itself, does not
stabilize the system, but destabilizes it. Only a debt restriction can stabilize it.
Fallacy #10: Economic models where debt is always repaid as promised
If debt were always paid back as promised, it would have not mattered much and
could have been “integrated out” and omitted from consideration, as is often done
implicitly in many economic models. But, as explained above, some agents will not
be able to pay it back, because debt creation is a statistically irreversible process. An
important question is what happens when the due date comes, but an agent cannot
pay back the debt. One possibility is that the agent would declare bankruptcy and
have the debt erased by a judge. However, another agent counted this debt obligation
as an asset, so it will be also erased. This process is similar to annihilation of particle-
antiparticle pairs connected by the strings of debt. Repayment of debt would also
annihilate it. Another option is that the agent would take new debt to pay the old
debt. Debt repayment would be postponed, and the total debt in the system would
continue to grow until it reaches a critical value, then triggering a massive cascade of
bankruptcies. This would be the Hyman Minsky moment [34]. Physics analogies of
this phenomenon include stick-slip motion and earthquakes, where stress gradually
builds up until tectonic plates move and release the stress, or forest ﬁres, where forest
grows until reaching a critical mass and then is swept by ﬁre. If borrowing and de-
faulting happened in a random uncorrelated manner among agents, the system could
have achieved a stationary steady state. However, in reality, debt growth and collapse
happens in a highly correlated and synchronized manner, when many agents do the
same thing, and a strong collective mode emerges in the system. A detailed concep-
tual understanding and mathematical description of switching between regimes of
debt expansion and debt contraction, qualitatively described by Minsky [34], is an
open problem for econophysics. From physics point of view, it represents a sponta-
neous time-translation symmetry breaking, where the system develops an oscillatory
(possibly chaotic) behavior in time, as opposed to a stationary, time-independent
equilibrium. There are attempts to describe this behavior using a system of nonlinear
ordinary diﬀerential equations [35], but a bigger challenge is to observe emergence of
this collective mode in a statistical ensemble of many interacting agents.
One well-known mechanism for synchronization of debt is inﬂation of collateral
prices. To feel safer about lending money, a lender may demand that a borrower


--- Page 16 ---
16
Will be inserted by the editor
pledges to transfer a tangible physical object (e.g. a house), called collateral, in case
of default on the debt. The maximal loan would be limited by the “market price” of
the collateral. But lending money for buying houses aﬀects their market prices, so the
price of the collateral would go up, and lending would increase further, and so on to
create a credit bubble. However, Basel regulations of banking issued by the Bank for
International Settlements failed to recognize this circular logic in “mark to market”
accounting. The problem is similar to the example of investment in gold discussed in
Sec. 2.3, but with the added run-away instability due to lending.
2.7 Banks
Peer-to-peer lending is somewhat similar to barter, in the sense that it involves pair-
wise promissory agreements of repayment between agents. At a higher level, lending
and borrowing can be aggregated and anonymized by the banks (that is commercial
banks, as opposed to the central bank, which is a public non-proﬁt agency of the
state). The agents willing to lend would deposit their money into a bank, and the
bank would lend this money to the agents willing to borrow. This arrangement scales
up the operation by aggregation and replaces pairwise debt agreements between the
agents by one-to-many debt agreements with the bank. As a result of the change in
the lending network topology, the depositors do not know any more to whom their
money is lent, which implies loss of information and increase in informational entropy.
Moreover, in contrast to peer-to-peer lending, the depositors can still use their
money, even though it is lent to other agents. The bank creates checking accounts for
the depositors, so they can write checks instead of using the actual money, whereas
the deposited money is placed by the commercial bank on reserve in the central bank.
Thus, a commercial bank has two faces, one toward the customers (depositors and
borrowers) and another toward the central bank, through which interbank transac-
tions (such as check clearing) are performed. When agent 1 with an account in bank A
writes a check to agent 2 with an account in bank B, the check is cleared via the cen-
tral bank, and the corresponding amount of reserves is transferred from the account
of bank A to the account of bank B in the central bank. Thus, interbank transactions
form yet another layer of the monetary economy on top of the inter-agent transaction
layer. Now the conservation of law of money applies to the bank reserves, which are
only transferred, but not created in interbank transactions.
Very importantly, because of aggregation, banks can support the volume of trans-
action among the agents much greater than the amount of bank reserves. If agent 1
writes a check to agent 2 who has an account in the same bank, check clearing does
not involve transfer of reserves, and the bank simply changes the digits on the ac-
counts of the agents. Moreover, when many customers of banks A and B write checks
in both directions, these checks partially cancel, so the daily net transfer of reserves
can be much smaller than the total volume of transactions. In addition, banks can
temporarily borrow reserves from each other and from the central bank (so, the whole
story of peer-to-peer landing described in Sec. 2.5 is repeated at the level of banks,
instead of the agents).
Fallacy #11: Banks create money (actually, they create debt)
The ability to support a larger volume of transactions with a smaller amount of
reserves is called the money multiplier eﬀect [23]. When agent 1 deposits her money
into a bank, she thinks that she still has this money, because she can write checks on
this amount. However, agent 2, who borrowed money from the bank, also thinks he


--- Page 17 ---
Will be inserted by the editor
17
has that money, because he can also write checks on that amount. It looks like the
amount of money in the system of agents has doubled, as described in Ch. 14 “How
Banks Create Money” in textbook [23]. However, the more appropriate title for this
chapter should have been “How Banks Create Debt”, because the increase of money
in circulation among agents is exactly equal to the increase of debt in the system.
When an agent requests a loan from the bank, the bank creates a checking account
for the agent with the corresponding balance, listed as liability on the balance sheet
of the bank, and obtains an IOU from the agent, listed as an asset on the balance
sheet of the bank. As in Sec. 2.6, bank lending is analogous to particle-antiparticle
pair creation. Agent 2 is still connected to the bank by the string or chain of debt, as
discussed in Sec. 2.5. Borrowing money is diﬀerent from receiving money as payment,
gift, or grant.
Once I had a discussion with the fellow econophysicist Joseph McCauley, who ar-
gued, like many economists, that he can create money with a few clicks on a computer
keyboard. Later I invited him to give a talk at the annual conference of the American
Physical Society. He responded that he is currently in Europe, but transatlantic air
tickets are very expensive, and he has no funding for travel. So, I recommended him
to do a few clicks on a computer keyboard and create money for his travel to the
conference. The problem here is obvious. It is true that debt can be easily created
with a few clicks, but debt is not the same as money, see Fallacy #7.
Notice also that debt creation for bank customers does not change reserves of the
banks held in the central bank, which are still subject to the conservation law. So,
the “endogenous” creation of money/debt by commercial banks for their customers is
not the same as the “exogenous” money injection by the state, described in Sec. 2.4,
which has no strings, chains, or debt attached to it. In MMT [25], these two types of
transactions are classiﬁed as horizontal and vertical.
Fallacy #12: Reserve requirements limit maximal debt
How much total debt can the banks create in this manner for the agents? By regu-
lations, banks must have the required reserves equal to the fraction R of the total
deposits, called the required reserve ratio. If the original money M0 (the money base)
is deposited into banks, the amount available to lending is equal to (1−R)M0, because
RM0 must be held in reserve. The borrowed money (1 −R)M0 would be deposited
into banks again, and the amount available for further lending is (1 −R)2M0. Con-
tinuing this geometrical progression, we ﬁnd that the money multiplier for maximal
permitted lending is M/M0 = 1/R [23], which implies the debt increase by the factor
of (1 −R)/R [8]. In addition to required reserves, banks also must have some excess
reserves to clear interbank transactions.
However, in reality, both limiting factors for the debt are actually soft, not hard,
constraints. The reserve requirements apply only to some ﬁnancial institutions (pri-
marily retail banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, FDIC),
but not to investment banks, hedge funds, shadow banks, etc., and do not apply to
certain types of accounts, e.g. business savings and time deposits [23]. Some countries
have no reserve requirements at all [36]. So, reserve requirements do not impose an
absolute limit on maximal debt created by the banks, which is more of a myth perpet-
uated by undergraduate economics textbooks [23]. Banks have even more ﬂexibility
with excess reserves and can ﬁnd various ways to minimize excess reserves and max-
imize lending, if they want to. For example, consolidation and mergers of the banks
resulted in fewer banks and more customers having accounts in the same bank. Check
clearing between these customers does not require excess reserves for transfers.


--- Page 18 ---
18
Will be inserted by the editor
2.8 Problems with run-away debt
Fallacy #12 indicates that banks can create unlimited debt. However, as discussed in
Sec. 2.1, a limit on negative balances is essential for stability of the system. If agents
can borrow unlimitedly, they can simply pay for goods and services with borrowed
money and not contribute in return, which would be free riding. Moreover, if the
banks can “create money” as easily as the textbook describes [23], they would also
create money for themselves, not only for their clients. Even worse, they may actually
use their clients as pawns and smoke screen to conceal and obfuscate money creation
for themselves. It is not just a fantasy. The textbook [23, p. 271] says that federal
investigators found criminal conduct in 40% of the failed Savings and Loans (S&L)
institutions in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Financial institutions “learned” from
their previous mistakes and made sure that no criminal investigations were conducted
at all in the much bigger crisis of 2008. One cannot escape suspicion that the ultimate
purpose of the enormously complicated, multilayered “ﬁnancial innovations”, such as
options, derivatives, default swaps, and various chopped, diced, sliced, and repackaged
“securities”, is to obfuscate and erase information about who is responsible for what.
Creating money for themselves out of nothing is the ultimate free riding, which is the
underlying reason for deep hostility that Main Street feels towards Wall Street.
However, although the loans created by the banks may produce an illusion of
money bonanza for a while, they still must to be paid back at the due date, at least
in theory. This leads to the Minsky moment of market crash described in Sec. 2.6.
But now the scale of this crisis is much greater than it would have been for peer-
to-peer lending, because of aggregation, consolidation, leveraging, and multiplication
by the banks. Such a crisis (as in 2008) threatens to take down the whole economy,
so the central bank has no choice but to step in and save the ﬁnancial system by
absorbing the losses. This game is played in two steps. In the ﬁrst step, the ﬁnancial
system issues huge amounts of loans to borrowers who have no ability to pay back.
Typical examples are subprime mortgages in USA and the Greek debt. Banks record
these loans as assets on their balance sheets. In the second step, some years later
when payments on loans are due, it becomes clear that the borrowers cannot pay.
This creates a huge crisis, so a public monetary authority has to step in. In USA,
the Federal Reserve buys a massive amount of toxic assets from the banks, adding
several trillions of freshly “printed” dollars to bank reserves (see Sec. 2.4). Similarly,
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) gives a new loan to Greece, so that it pays
back the debt to private commercial lenders. In both cases, the net result is that
the banks have exchanged the toxic debt assets created in the ﬁrst step for the real,
exogenously created, money from the central monetary authorities in the second step,
i.e. the second step monetizes the debt created in the ﬁrst step. At the end, Greece
is nominally in debt to IMF, but still cannot pay, so, most likely, this debt will
be eventually written oﬀ. The motto of this game is “privatize gains and socialize
losses”. For the second step, the bailout by the central bank, to happen, it is essential
that the crisis created in the ﬁrst step has a catastrophic scale, because otherwise the
central bank would not bother to step in and would not supply new money. Thus, one
comes to conclusion that creation of large-scale crises is essential part of the current
ﬁnancial system modus operandi. It is needed to transform the endogenously created
money/debt by commercial banks in the ﬁrst step into the exogenously created money
by the central bank in the second step.
The crisis of 2008 is by no means unique. The S&L crisis in the late 1980s – early
1990s required a bailout by the government to the tune of $200 billion [23, p. 271].
The discussion of the S&L crisis in the 20-years-old textbook edition of 1996 [23] is
eerily similar to what we heard later about the 2008 crisis.


--- Page 19 ---
Will be inserted by the editor
19
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Percentage of total income in tail
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Average income in k$
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
α
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
0.5
0.6
Gini
0.5
0.6
G = 1 + f
2
◦
f
(a)
(b)
(c)
QE
bubble
housing
bubble
.com
bubble
⟨ r ⟩
T
Fig. 1. (a) The Gini coeﬃcient G for income distribution in the USA in 1983–2013 (con-
nected line), compared with the theoretical formula G = (1 + f)/2 (open circles). (b) The
exponent α of the power-law tail of income distribution. (c) The average income ⟨r⟩in the
whole system, the average income T in the lower class (the temperature of the exponential
part), and the fraction of income f = 1 −T/⟨r⟩going to the upper class.
2.9 The eﬀect of Quantitative Easing on income inequality
The described above lend-crash-bailout cycle is a far cry from the original purpose
of money, described in Sec. 2.1 as the accounting tool needed to prevent free riding
and ensure fair exchange of goods and services. As described in Sec. 2.4, a central
bank can print any amount of money, but the important question is to whom this
money will be given. Unlike executive government, which can spend money on roads
and bridges and has many other useful channels for injecting new money into the
economy, the central bank can only deal with commercial banks. So, the new money
from the Fed inevitably goes to the banks, i.e. to the bankers, i.e. to the upper class
described at the end of Sec. 1, thus increasing inequality in the society.
This conclusion is supported by the data. Figure 1 shows a two-class analysis of
income distribution data from IRS for USA in 1983–2013. In panel (c), ⟨r⟩is the
mean income per capita in the whole system, T is the income temperature in the


--- Page 20 ---
20
Will be inserted by the editor
exponential distribution P(r) ∝e−r/T for the lower class, and f = 1 −T/⟨r⟩is the
fraction of income going to the upper class. Panel (b) shows the exponent α of the
power-law distribution P(r) ∝1/r1+α for the upper class. Panel (a) shows the Gini
coeﬃcient G compared with the theoretically derived formula G = (1+f)/2 [8,15,16].
The spikes on the red curve for f in panel (c) indicate sharp increases of inequality
due to enhanced share of income going to the upper class. The 1st spike coincides
with the .com bubble in stock market, the 2nd spike with the housing bubble, and
the 3rd spike with Quantitative Easing (QE) pursued by the Federal Reserve. As we
see, inequality peaks during speculative bubbles in the markets. The 3rd spike gives
direct evidence that the bailout of the ﬁnancial system by the Fed resulted in increase
of inequality. This issue has been also brought up in the media [37].
2.10 The ultimate source of capitalist monetary proﬁt is state money
The lend-crash-bailout cycle also gives an insight into the two related questions,
which puzzle many people who try to think logically and critically about economic
matters. First, everybody expects their money to grow due to interest. Where this
extra money would come from to pay interest to everybody, given that money is
conserved in transactions? The second question is about capitalist proﬁts, which was
framed by Karl Marx in Capital as the money-commodity-money, M −C−M ′, circuit.
Suppose capitalists have the initial stock of money M, but would like to have even
more money. (Apparently, pursuit of an ever increasing abstract number is the goal in
itself for many people. The Wall Street people say that the purpose of money is just
to keep the score, as in sports competition.) So, the capitalists spend the money M
to build factories, hire workers, buy raw materials, and eventually produce consumer
commodity C, say cars. Now they expect to sell the commodity C on the market
and end up with a higher money balance M ′ > M, i.e. with a proﬁt. However, to
whom would this commodity be sold? Assuming that it is a consumer product for the
masses, like cars, it would be sold to the workers, who can pay for it only as much
as they were paid by the capitalists. So, in aggregate, the net money balance M ′ of
the capitalists after selling the cars cannot exceed their initial balance M. Individual
capitalists may achieve proﬁts by creating losses for less successful competitors, but
the whole class of capitalists cannot have net proﬁt.
Both interest and proﬁt can be funded, if consumers go into debt and temporarily
generate extra money in the system via particle-antiparticle pair creation. But sooner
or later this debt has to be paid back via annihilation process. The ﬁnancial system
would use various tricks to postpone the day of reckoning. However, in the same way
as prevention of small forest ﬁres results in accumulation of fuel and eventual huge,
catastrophic forest ﬁre [38], the accumulated postponed debt eventually leads to a
catastrophic crisis. At this point, the state (the government and the central bank)
have to step in and inject new exogenous money into the system, which ends up
producing proﬁt and interest. So, one comes to conclusion that the ultimate source
of capitalist monetary proﬁts is state money. This conclusion is supported by MMT
[27]. However, tellingly, neither MMT nor Minsky are ever mentioned in the 1996
edition of the economics textbook [23].
3 Conclusions
Physicists approach economics from a diﬀerent perspective and with diﬀerent em-
phasis, as described in Sec. 1. Conservation laws play very important role in physics,
but are rarely formulated explicitly in economics, even when they actually exist. My


--- Page 21 ---
Will be inserted by the editor
21
personal response to the title of this special issue “Can Economics Be a Physical Sci-
ence?” is that economics would beneﬁt from closer attention to conservation laws, as
physical sciences do. I have been obsessed with conservation of money for many years.
I have also heard all kind of objections against such a conservation law. This paper
is an attempt to catalog and respond to these objections, as well as to clarify related
fallacies and confusion. Much of this confusion is caused by imprecise language and
thinking, substitution of terminology, failure to consider all involved elements, etc. It
may very well be that the arguments presented in this paper suﬀer from the same deﬁ-
ciencies. So, in the spirit of the Discussion and Debate issue, this is a discussion paper
and an invitation for a debate. If the readers disagree with presented arguments, they
are welcome to present counter-arguments in a healthy debate. Hopefully, a better
understanding of the subject would emerge as a result.
Instead of repeating main points of the paper, I would like to mention some
important topics not included here and future directions. The paper focuses primarily
on money as an abstract digital tool and does not discuss much the physical world.
However, there are intriguing connections between money, debt, and dwindling supply
of fossil fuels [39]. This is a very interesting and important topic, but it is outside the
volume and scope of this paper.
I argued throughout the paper that the purpose of money is to prevent free riding
and mostly considered the one-to-one network topology of transactions among agents.
This approach may be appropriate for the economy focused on production of multiple
copies of physical objects, e.g. cars. However, in the 21st century, the economy is
shifting toward production of digital objects: software, digital content, online services,
etc. Digital objects, unlike physical ones, can be copied and replicated at essentially
zero cost. As a result, network topology of economic transactions between producers
and consumers changes drastically. In one-to-many topology, the same software or
app is used by dozens or millions or even billions users around the world. In many-to-
many topology, many developers work on a product used by many users. What is the
fair pricing of a digital product in these cases? Because digital objects can be copied
so easily, it is often very diﬃcult or practically impossible to collect fees for a product
from all users. Much of the software and digital content that we use is obtained for
free, without payment. Here I do not mean pirated products, but many products
oﬃcially oﬀered for free. Thus, most of us enjoy free riding with respect to digital
products. Perhaps the old-fashioned concept of money and obsession with free riding
are not quite suitable for the digital economy. On the other hand, there are multiple
ongoing attempts to invent digital money, such as bitcoin. The new digital money
do not have to replicate old money and could have new digital features non-existent
in the old money. For example, when scholarly publishing shifted from printing on
paper to online delivery (from journals as physical objects to digital objects), many
new features became available to the authors and readers, but the business model of
publishing was also profoundly aﬀected. In conclusion, money is not a static, but an
evolving tool, and it remains to be seen what future money will be.
I thank Benedict Mondal for preparation of Fig. 1 and Ilya Kuntsevich of Beverly Investment
Group, whose book [40] addresses many related issues, for numerous discussions.
References
1. All papers are available at http://physics.umd.edu/~yakovenk/econophysics/
2. L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics (Butterworth-Heinemann, 1980)
3. A. A. Dr˘agulescu and V. M. Yakovenko, “Statistical mechanics of money”, Eur. Phys.
J. B 17 (2000) 723–729


--- Page 22 ---
22
Will be inserted by the editor
4. E. M. Lifshitz and L. P. Pitaevskii, Physical Kinetics (Butterworth-Heinemann, 1981)
5. S. Ispolatov, P. L. Krapivsky, and S. Redner “Wealth distributions in asset exchange
models”, Eur. Phys. J. B 2 (1998) 267–276
6. A. Chakraborti and B. K. Chakrabarti, “Statistical mechanics of money: how saving
propensity aﬀects its distribution”, Eur. Phys. J. B 17 (2000) 167–170
7. J. Angle, “The surplus theory of social stratiﬁcation and the size distribution of personal
wealth”, Social Forces 65 (1986) 293–326
8. V. M. Yakovenko and J. B. Rosser Jr., “Colloquium: Statistical mechanics of money,
wealth, and income,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 81 (2009) 1703–1725
9. B. K. Chakrabarti, A. Chakraborti, S. R. Chakravarty, and A. Chatterjee, Econophysics
of Income and Wealth Distributions (Cambridge University Press, 2013)
10. H. E. Stanley et al., “Anomalous ﬂuctuations in the dynamics of complex systems: from
DNA and physiology to econophysics”, Physica A 224 (1996) 302–321
11. B. K. Chakrabarti (2005) “Econophys-Kolkata: a short story”, in Econophysics of Wealth
Distributions, edited by A. Chatterjee, S. Yarlagadda, and B. K. Chakrabarti (Springer,
Milan, 2005), pp 225–228
12. A. A. Dr˘agulescu and V. M. Yakovenko, “Evidence for the exponential distribution of
income in the USA”, Eur. Phys. J. B 20 (2001) 585–589
13. A. A. Dr˘agulescu and V. M. Yakovenko, “Exponential and power-law probability distri-
butions of wealth and income in the United Kingdom and the United States”, Physica
A 299 (2001) 213–221
14. A. A. Dr˘agulescu and V. M. Yakovenko, “Statistical mechanics of money, income, and
wealth: a short survey”, in Modeling of Complex Systems: Seventh Granada Lectures,
edited by P. L. Garrido and J. Marro (American Institute of Physics [AIP] Conference
Proceedings 661, New York, 2003), pp 180–183
15. A. C. Silva and V. M. Yakovenko, “Temporal evolution of the ‘thermal’ and ‘superther-
mal’ income classes in the USA during 1983–2001”, Europhys. Lett. 69 (2005) 304–310
16. A. Banerjee and V. M. Yakovenko, “Universal patterns of inequality”, New J. Phys. 12
(2010) 075032
17. Thomas Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century (Harvard University Press, 2014)
18. Adrian Cho, “Physicists say it’s simple”, Science 344 (2014) 828
19. V. M. Yakovenko, “Applications of statistical mechanics to economics: Entropic origin
of the probability distributions of money, income, and energy consumption”, in Social
Fairness and Economics: Economic essays in the spirit of Duncan Foley, edited by
L. Taylor, A. Rezai, and T. Michl (Routledge, 2013), pp 53–82
20. S. Lawrence, Q. Liu, and V. M. Yakovenko, “Global inequality in energy consumption
from 1980 to 2010”, Entropy 15 (2013) 5565–5579
21. U. Bott, “The coming global economic ice age?”, The Globalist, 12 August 2013,
http://www.theglobalist.com/the-coming-global-economic-ice-age/
22. Larry Summers, Secular Stagnation, http://larrysummers.com/secular-stagnation/
23. C. R. McConnell and S. L. Brue Economics: Principles, Problems, and Policies
(McGraw-Hill, New York, 13th edition, 1996)
24. Local
Exchange
Trading
System
(LETS),
Wikipedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Local_exchange_trading_system
25. Modern Monetary Theory (MMT), Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern_Monetary_Theory
26. “Mainstream
economics
and
Modern
Monetary
Theory:
A
family
tree”,
The
Washington
Post,
February
17,
2012,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/mainstream-economics-and-modern-monetary-theory-a-family-tree/2012/02/17/gIQ
27. Randall Wray, Modern Money Theory (Palgrave Macmillan, 2012)
28. Justin Chen and V. M. Yakovenko, Computer Animation of Money Exchange Models,
http://physics.umd.edu/~yakovenk/econophysics/animation.html
29. New
Economic
Policy
in
Soviet
history,
Wikipedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Economic_Policy
30. V.
M.
Yakovenko,
KITP
colloquium,
May
13,
2009,
http://online.itp.ucsb.edu/online/colloq/yakovenko2/
31. H. S. Dent, The Great Boom Ahead (Hyperion, New York, 1993)


--- Page 23 ---
Will be inserted by the editor
23
32. Richard Duncan, “QE Is Debt Cancellation”, The Globalist, August 28, 2015,
http://www.theglobalist.com/qe-debt-cancellation-world-economy/
33. Jesse
Colombo,
“Why
The
Worst
Is
Still
Ahead
For
Turkey’s
Bubble
Economy”,
Forbes,
March
5,
2014,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/jessecolombo/2014/03/05/why-the-worst-is-still-ahead-for-turkeys-bubble-economy
34. Minsky moment, Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minsky_moment
35. S. Keen, “Finance and economic breakdown: Modeling Minsky’s ﬁnancial instability
hypothesis”, J. Post Keynesian Econ. 17 (1995) 607–635
36. Reserve requirement, Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_requirement
37. Ylan
Q.
Mui,
“Now
we
know
what
the
Federal
Reserve
did
to
inequality”,
The
Washington
Post,
June
1,
2015,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/06/01/now-we-know-what-the-federal-reserve-did-to-inequali
38. Greg Ip, Foolproof: Why Safety Can Be Dangerous and How Danger Makes Us Safe
(Hachette, 2015)
39. Gail Tverberg, “A new theory of energy and the economy, Part 3: The prob-
lem of debt as we reach oil limits”, The Energy Collective, February 13, 2015,
http://www.theenergycollective.com/gail-tverberg/2193466/problem-debt-we-reach-oil-limits
40. Ilya Vladimirovich Kuntsevich, Economical Equilibrium: Geometry of Economics (ISBN
1492387517, 2013), http://www.economicalequilibrium.com
