--- Page 1 ---
 
1
 
 
Handwritten digit Recognition using Support 
Vector Machine 
 
Anshuman Sharma 
(anshuman515@gmail.com) 
 
 
Abstract: Handwritten Numeral recognition plays a vital role in postal automation services especially in 
countries like India where multiple languages and scripts are used Discrete Hidden Markov Model (HMM) 
and hybrid of Neural Network (NN) and HMM are popular methods in handwritten word recognition 
system. The hybrid system gives better recognition result due to better discrimination capability of the NN. 
A major problem in handwriting recognition is the huge variability and distortions of patterns. Elastic 
models based on local observations and dynamic programming such HMM are not efficient to absorb this 
variability. But their vision is local. But they cannot face to length variability and they are very sensitive to 
distortions. Then the SVM is used to estimate global correlations and classify the pattern. Support Vector 
Machine (SVM) is an alternative to NN. In Handwritten recognition, SVM gives a better recognition result. 
The aim of this paper is to develop an approach which improve the efficiency of handwritten recognition 
using artificial neural network 
Keyword: Handwriting recognition, Support Vector Machine, Neural Network 
 
1. Introduction 
Handwritten Recognition refers to the process of 
translating images of hand-written, typewritten, or 
printed digits into a format understood by user for 
the purpose of editing, indexing/searching, and a 
reduction in storage size. Handwritten recognition 
system is having its own importance and it is 
adoptable in various fields such as online 
handwriting recognition on computer tablets, 
recognize zip codes on mail for postal mail 
sorting, processing bank check amounts, numeric 
entries in forms filled up by hand and so on. There 
are two distinct handwriting recognition domains; 
online and offline, which are differentiated by the 
nature of their input signals. In offline system, 
static representation of a digitized document is 
used in applications such as cheque, form, mail or 
document processing. On the other hand, online 
handwriting recognition (OHR) systems rely on 
information acquired during the production of the 
handwriting. They require specific equipment that 
allows the capture of the trajectory of the writing 
tool. Mobile communication systems such as 
Personal Digital Assistant (PDA), electronic pad 
and 
smart-phone 
have 
online 
handwriting 
recognition 
interface 
integrated 
in 
them. 
Therefore, it is important to further improve on 
the 
recognition 
performances 
for 
these 
applications while trying to constrain space for 
parameter storage and improving processing 
speed. Figure 1 shows an online handwritten 
Word recognition system. Many current systems 
use Discrete Hidden Markov Model based 
recognizer or a hybrid of Neural Network (NN) 
and Hidden Markov Model (HMM) for the 
recognition 
 
 
 
 Online information captured by the input device 
first needs to go through some filtration, 
preprocessing and normalization processes. After 


--- Page 2 ---
 
2
normalization, the writing is usually segmented 
into basic units (normally character or part of 
character) and each segment is classified and 
labeled. Using HMM search algorithm in the 
context of a language model, the most likely word 
path is then returned to the user as the intended 
string [1]. Segmentation process can be performed 
in various ways. However, observation probability 
for each segment is normally obtained by using a 
neural network (NN) and a Hidden Markov Model 
(HMM) estimates the probabilities of transitions 
within a resulting word path. This research aims 
to investigate the usage of support vector 
machines (SVM) in place of NN in a hybrid 
SVM/HMM recognition system. The 
main 
objective is to further improve the recognition 
rate[6,7] by using support vector machine (SVM) 
at the segment classification level. This is 
motivated 
by 
successful 
earlier 
work 
by 
Ganapathiraju  in a hybrid SVM/HMM speech 
recognition (SR) system and the work by 
Bahlmann [8] in OHR. Ganapathiraju obtained 
better recognition rate Compared to hybrid 
NN/HMM SR system. In this work, SVM is first 
developed and used to tra zin an OHR system 
using character databases. SVM with probabilistic 
output are then developed for use in the hybrid 
system. Eventually, the SVM will be integrated 
with the HMM module for word recognition. 
Preliminary results of using SVM for character 
recognition are given and compared with results 
using NN reported by Poisson [9]. The following 
databases were used: IRONOFF, UNIPEN and the 
mixture IRONOFF-UNIPEN databases.  
 
2. Existing Techniques 
2.1 Modified discrimination function 
(MQDF) Classifier 
G. S. Lehal and Nivedan Bhatt [10] designed a 
recognition system for handwritten Devangari 
Numeral using Modified discrimination function 
(MQDF) classifier. A recognition rate and a 
confusion rate were obtained as 89% and 4.5% 
respectively. 
 
2.2 Neural Network on Devenagari Numerals  
R. Bajaj, L. Dey, S. Chaudhari [11] used neural 
network based classification scheme. Numerals 
were represented by feature vectors of three types. 
Three different neural classifiers had been used 
for classification of these numerals. Finally, the 
outputs of 
the three classifiers were combined using a  
connectionist scheme. A 3-layer MLP was used 
for implementing the classifier for segment-based 
features. Their work produced recognition rate of 
89.68%. 
2.3 Gaussian Distribution Function 
R. J. Ramteke et.al applied classifiers on 2000 
numerals 
images 
obtained 
from 
different 
individuals of different professions. The results of 
PCA, correlation coefficient and perturbed 
moments 
are 
an 
experimental 
success 
as 
compared to MIs. This research produced 92.28% 
recognition rate by considering 77 feature 
dimensions. 
2.4 Fuzzy classifier on Hindi Numerals 
M. Hanmandlu, A.V. Nath, A.C. Mishra and V.K. 
Madasu used fuzzy membership function for 
recognition of Handwritten Hindi Numerals and 
produce 96% recognition rate. To recognize the 
unknown numeral set, an exponential variant of 
fuzzy membership function was selected and it 
was constructed using the normalized vector 
distance. 
2.5 Multilayer Perceptron 
Ujjwal Bhattacharya, B. B. Chaudhuri [11] used a 
distinct 
MLP 
classifier. 
They 
worked 
on 
Devanagari, Bengali and English handwritten 
numerals. A back propagation (BP) algorithm was 
used for training the MLP classifiers. It provided 
99.27% and 99.04% recognition accuracies on the 
original training and test sets of Devanagari 
numeral database, respectively. 
2.6 Quadratic classifier for Devanagari 
Numerals 
U. Pal, T. Wakabayashi, N. Sharma and F. 
Kimura [14] developed a modified quadratic 
classifier for recognition of offline handwritten 
numerals of six popular Indian scripts; viz. They 
had used 64 dimensional features for high-speed  
recognition. A five-fold cross validation technique 
has been used for result computation and obtained 
99.56% 
accuracy 
from 
Devnagari 
scripts, 
respectively. 
3. Proposed Approach 
3.1 Support Vector Machine (SVM) 
SVM in its basic form implement two class 
classifications. It has been used in recent years as 
an alternative to popular methods such as neural 
network. The advantage of SVM, is that it takes 
into account both experimental data and structural 
behavior for better generalization capability based 
on the principle of structural risk minimization 
(SRM). Its formulation approximates SRM 
principle by maximizing the margin 
of class separation, the reason for it to be known 
also as large margin classifier. The basic SVM 
formulation is for linearly separable datasets. It 
can be used for nonlinear datasets by indirectly 
mapping the nonlinear inputs into to linear feature 
space where the maximum Margin decision 
function is approximated. The mapping is done by 
using a kernel function. Multi class classification 


--- Page 3 ---
 
3
can be performed by modifying the 2 class 
scheme. The objective of recognition is to 
interpret a sequence of numerals taken from the 
test set. The architecture of proposed system is 
given in fig. 3.The SVM (binary classifier) is 
applied to multi class numeral recognition 
problem by using one-versus-rest type method. 
The SVM is trained with the training samples 
using linear kernel. Classifier performs its 
function in two phases; Training and Testing. [29] 
After preprocessing and Feature Extraction 
process, Training is performed by considering the 
feature vectors which are stored in the form of 
matrices. Result of training is used for testing the 
numerals. Algorithm for Training is given in 
algorithm. 
 
3.2 Statistical Learning Theory 
Support Vector Machines have been developed by 
Vapnik in the framework of Statistical Learning 
Theory [13]. In statistical learning theory (SLT), 
the problem of classification in supervised 
learning is formulated as follows: 
We are given a set of l training data and its class, 
{(x1,y1)...(xl,yl)} in Rn × R sampled according to 
unknown joint probability distribution P(x,y) 
characterizing how the classes are spread in Rn 
× R. To measure the performance of the classifier, 
a loss function L(y,f(x)) is defined as follows:  
 
 
 
L(y,f(x)) is zero if f classifies x correctly, one 
otherwise. On average, how f performs can be 
described by the Risk functional: 
 
ERM principle states that given the training set 
and a set of possible classifiers in the hypothesis 
space F, we Should choose f ⊂ F that minimizes 
Remp(f). However, which generalizes well to 
unseen data due to over fitting phenomena. 
Remp(f) is a poor, over-optimistic approximation 
of R(f), the true risk. Neural network classifier 
relies on ERM principle. The normal practice to 
get a more realistic estimate of generalization 
error, as in neural network is to divide the 
available data into training and test set. Training 
set is used to find a Classifier with minimal 
empirical error (optimize the weight of an MLP 
neural networks) while the test set is used to find  
 
the generalization error (error rate on the Test set). 
If we have different sets of classifier hypothesis 
space F1, F2 … e.g. MLP neural networks with 
different topologies, we can select a classifier 
from each hypothesis space (each topology) with 
minimal Remp(f) and choose the final classifier 
with minimal generalization error. However, to do 
that requires designing and training potentially 
large number of individual classifiers. Using SLT, 
we do not need to do that. Generalization error 
can be directly minimized by minimizing an upper 
bound of the risk functional R(f). 
The bound given below holds for any distribution 
P(x,y) with probability of at least 1- η : 
 
 
where the parameter h denotes the so called VC 
(Vapnik-Chervonenkis) 
dimension. 
φ is 
the 
confidence term defined by Vapnik [10] as : 
 
 
 
ERM is not sufficient to find good classifier 
because even with small Remp(f), when h is large 
compared to l, φ 
will be large, so R(f) will also be large, ie: not 
optimal. 
We 
actually 
need 
to 
minimize 
Remp(f)and φ at the same time, a process which is 
called structural risk 
Minimization (SRM). By SRM, we do not need 
test set for model selection anymore. Taking 
different sets of classifiers F1, F2 … with known 
h1, h2 … we can select f 
from one of the set with minimal Remp(f), 
compute  
 
 and choose a classifier with minimal R(f).No 
more evaluation on test set needed, at least in 
theory. However, we still have to train potentially 
very large 
number of individual classifiers. To avoid this, we 
want to make h tunable (ie: to cascade a potential 
classifier Fi with VC dimension = h and choose 
an optimal f from an optimal Fi in a single 
optimization step. This is done in large margin 
classification. 
 
3.3  SVM formulations 
SVM is realized from the above SLT framework. 
The simplest formulation of SVM is linear, where 
the decision hyper plane lies in the space of the 
input data x. 


--- Page 4 ---
 
4
 
 
 
In this case the hypothesis space is a subset of all 
hyper planes of the form: f(x) = w⋅x +b. SVM 
finds an optimal hyper plane as the solution to the 
learning Problem which is geometrically the   
furthest from both classes since that will 
generalize best for future unseen data. 
There are two ways of finding the optimal 
decision hyper plane. The first is by finding a 
plane that bisects the two closest points of the two 
convex hulls defined by the set of points of each 
class, as shown in figure 2. The second is by 
maximizing the margin between two supporting 
planes as shown in figure 3. 
Both methods will produce the same optimal 
decision plane and the same set of points that 
support the solution (the closest points on the two 
convex hulls in figure 2 or the points on the two 
parallel supporting planes in figure 3). These are 
called the support vectors. 
4. Feature Extraction 
4.1 Moment Invariants 
The moment invariants (MIs) [1] are used to 
evaluate seven distributed parameters of a 
numeral image. In any character Recognition  
 
system, the characters are processed to extract 
features that uniquely represent properties of the 
character. Based on normalized central moments, 
a set of seven moment invariants is derived. 
Further, the resultant image was thinned and 
seven moments were extracted. Thus we had 14 
features (7 original and 7 thinned), which are 
applied as features for recognition using Gaussian 
Distribution Function. To increase the success 
rate, the new features need to be extracted by 
applying Affine Invariant Moment method. 
 
4.2 Affine Moment Invariants 
The Affine Moment Invariants were derived by 
means of the theory of algebraic invariants. Full 
derivation and comprehensive discussion on the 
properties of invariants can be found. Four 
features 
can 
be 
computed 
for 
character 
recognition. Thus overall 18 features have been 
used for Support Vector Machine. 
5. Experiment 
    5.1 Data Set Description 
In this paper, the UCI Machine learning data set 
are 
used. 
The UCI 
Machine 
Learning 
Repository is a collection of databases, domain 
theories, and data generators that are used by the 
machine learning community for the empirical 
analysis of machine learning algorithms. One of 
the available datasets is the Optical Recognition 
of the Handwritten Digits Data Set. The dataset of 
handwritten assamese characters by collecting 
samples from 45 writers is created. Each writer 
contributed 52 basic characters, 10 numerals and 
121 assamese conjunct consonants. The total 
number of entries corresponding to each writer is 
183 (= 52 characters + 10 numerals + 121 
conjunct consonants). The total number of 
samples in the dataset is 8235 ( = 45 × 183 ).  
The handwriting samples were collected on an 
iball 8060U external digitizing tablet connected to 
a laptop using its cordless digital stylus pen. The 
distribution of the dataset consists of 45 folders. 
This file contains information about the character 
id (ID), character name (Label) and actual shape 
of the character (Char).  
In the raw Optdigits data, digits are represented as 
32x32 matrices. They are also available in a pre-
processed form in which digits have been divided 
into non-overlapping blocks of 4x4 and the 
number of on pixels have been counted in each 
block. This generated 8x8 input matrices where 
each element is an integer in the range 0.16. 


--- Page 5 ---
 
5
                 
 
 Fig4 - Sample digits extracted from the raw 
Optdigits dataset. 
 
5.2 Data Preprocessing 
For the experiments using SVM, example isolated 
characters are preprocessed and 7 local features 
for each point of the spatially resample online 
signal were extracted. For each example character 
there are 350 feature values as input to the SVM. 
We use SVM with RBF kernel, since RBF kernel 
has been shown to generally give better 
recognition result [7]. Grid search was done to 
find the best values for the C and gamma 
(representing  
   in the original RBF kernel 
formulation) for the final SVM models and by 
that, C = 8 and gamma = 
 were chosen.  
 
5.4 Experimental Results  
  5.4.1 Test application Analysis 
The test application accompanying the source 
code can perform the recognition of handwritten 
digits. To do so, open the application (preferably 
outside Visual Studio, for better performance). 
Click on the menu File and select Open. This will 
load some entries from the Optdigits dataset into 
the application. 
 
 
      Fig.5: Optdigits data loaded into the 
application 
To perform the analysis, click the Run Analysis 
button. Please be aware that it may take some 
time. After the analysis is complete, the other tabs 
in the sample application will be populated with 
the analysis' information. The level of importance 
of each factor found during the discriminant 
analysis is plotted in a pie graph for easy visual 
inspection. 
Once the analysis is complete, we can test its 
classification ability in the testing data set. The 
green rows have been correctly identified by the 
discriminant space Euclidean distance classifier. 
We can see that it correctly identifies 98% of the 
testing data. The testing and training data set are 
disjoint and independent. 
 
   Fig.6: Using the default values in the 
application 
 
5.5 Results 
After the analysis has been completed and 
validated, we can use it to classify the new digits 
drawn directly in the application. The bars on the 
right show the relative response for each of the 
discriminant 
functions. 
Each 
class 
has 
a 
discriminant function that outputs a closeness 
measure for the input point. The classification is 
based on which function produces the maximum 
output. 
 
Fig 6: We can see the analysis also performs 
rather well on completely new and previously 
unseen data. 


--- Page 6 ---
 
6
88%
90%
92%
94%
96%
98%
100%
102%
389
380
389
387
376
377
387
380
382
Data Set
Accuracy 
Support Vector
Machine
Hidden Markov Model
Experiments were performed on different samples 
having mixed scripting languages on numerals 
using single hidden layer.  
 
Table 1: Detail Recognition performance of SVM 
on UCI datasets 
 
Table 2: Detail Recognition performance of SVM 
and HMM on UCI datasets 
 
 
 
 
Table 3: Recognition Rate of Each Numeral in 
DATASET. 
 
It is observed that recognition rate using SVM is 
higher than Hidden Markov Model. However, free 
parameter storage for SVM model is significantly 
higher. The memory space required for SVM will 
be the number of support vectors multiply by the 
number of feature values (in this case 350). This 
is significantly large compared to HMM which 
only need to store the weight. HMM needs less 
space 
due 
to 
the 
weight-sharing 
scheme. 
However, in SVM, space saving can be achieved 
by storing only the original online signals and the 
penup/ pen-down status in a compact manner. 
During recognition, the model will be expanded 
dynamically as required. Table 3 shows the 
comparison of recognition rates between HMM 
and SVM using all three databases. SVM clearly 
outperforms in all three isolated character cases.  
The result for the isolated character cases above 
indicates that the recognition rate for the hybrid 
word recognizer could be improved by using 
SVM instead of HMM. Thus, we are currently 
implementing word recognizer using both HMM 
and SVM and comparing their performance. 
Fig 7: Graph Representation between HMM and 
SVM 
6. Conclusion 
Handwriting recognition is a challenging field in 
the machine learning and this work identifies 
Support Vector Machines as a potential solution. 
The number of support vectors can be reduced by 
selecting better C and gamma parameter values 
through a finer grid search and by reduced set 
selection Work on integrating the SVM character 
recognition framework into the HMM based word 
recognition framework is on the way. In the 
hybrid 
system, 
word 
preprocessing 
and 
normalization needs to be done before SVM is 
then used for character hypothesis recognition and 
word likelihood computation using HMM. It is 
envisaged 
that, 
due 
to 
SVM’s 
better 
discrimination capability, word recognition rate 
will be better than in a HMM hybrid system. 
 
  REFRENCES: -  
 
[1] Sandip Kaur, “ Recognition of Handwritten 
Devanagri Script using Feature Based on Zernike 
Moments and Zoning and Neural Network 
Classifier”, A M. Tech. Thesis Report, Panjabi 
University, Patiala, 2004, pp.  
[2] Gaurav Jain, Jason Ko, “Handwritten Digits 
Recognition”, 
Multimedia 
Systems, 
Project 
Report, University of Toronto, November 21, 
2008, pp. 1-3. 
[3] Scott D. Connell, R.M.K. Sinha, Ani1 K. Jain 
“Recognition 
of 
Unconstrained 
On-Line 
Devanagari Characters”, 2000, IEEE. 
[4] A.K. Jain, Robert P.W.Duin, Jianchang Mao, “ 
Statistical Pattern Recognition: A Review”, IEEE 
Trans. PAMI, Vol.22, No. 1, 2000. 
[5] Anuj Sharma, “Online Handwritten Gurmukhi 
Character Recognition”, A Ph. D. Thesis report, 
School of [6] Shubhangi D.C., P.S.Hiremath, 
“Multi-Class 
SVM 
Classifier 
for 
English 
Handwritten Digit Recognition using Manual 
Class Segmentation”, Proc. Int’l Conf. on 
Advances in Computing. Communication and 
Control (ICAC3’09) 2009, pp. 353-356. 


--- Page 7 ---
 
7
[6] Sabri A. Mahmoud and Sameh M. Awaida, 
“Recognition Of Off-Line Handwritten Arabic 
(Indian) Numerals Using Multi-Scale Features 
And Support Vector Machines Vs. Hidden 
Markov Models” The Arabian Journal For 
Science And Engineering, Volume 34, Number 
2b, October , 2009,Pp. 430-444.  
[7] A.Borji, and M. Hamidi, “Support Vector 
Machine 
for 
Persian 
Font 
Recognition”, 
International Journal of Intelligent Systems and 
Technologies, Summer 2007, pp. 184-187 
[8] C. Vasantha Lakshmi, Ritu Jain, C. 
Patvardhan, “Handwritten Devanagari Numerals 
Recognition With Higher Accuracy”, Proc. of 
IEEE Int. Conf. on 
Computational 
Intelligence 
and 
Multimidia 
Application, 2007, pp 255-259. 
[9] U.Bhattacharya, B.B.Chaudhari, “Handwritten 
Numeral Databases of Indian Scripts and 
Multistage Recognition of Mixed Numerals”, 
IEEE Trans. on PAMI, Vol.31, No.3, 2009, 
pp.444-457. 
[10] U. Pal, T. Wakabayashi, N. Sharma and F. 
Kimura, “Handwritten Numeral Recognition of 
Six Popular Indian Scripts”, Proc. 9th ICDAR, 
Curitiba,  Brazil, Vol.2 (2007),749-753. 
[11] Christopher M. Bishop, “Pattern Recognition 
and Machine Learning”, Springer Publication, 
Singapore, 2006, Pp. 1-3, 308-320. 
