--- Page 1 ---
ISSN: 2278 – 1323 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET) 
Volume 1, Issue 9, November 2012 
 
135 
All Rights Reserved © 2012 IJARCET 
 
 
    Abstract— This paper mainly addresses the building of   
face recognition system by using Principal Component 
Analysis (PCA).  PCA is a statistical approach used for 
reducing the number of variables in face recognition. In 
PCA, every image in the training set is represented as a 
linear combination of weighted eigenvectors called 
eigenfaces. 
These 
eigenvectors 
are 
obtained 
from 
covariance matrix of a training image set. The weights are 
found out after selecting a set of most relevant Eigenfaces. 
Recognition is performed by projecting a test image onto 
the subspace spanned by the eigenfaces and then 
classification is done by measuring minimum Euclidean 
distance. A number of experiments were done to evaluate 
the performance of the face recognition system. In this 
thesis, we used a training database of students of 
Electronics 
and 
Telecommunication 
Engineering 
department, 
Batch-2007, 
Rajshahi 
University 
of 
Engineering and Technology, Bangladesh. 
    
Index Terms—PCA, Eigenvalue, Eigenvector, Covariance, 
Euclidean distance, Eigenface. 
  
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Over the last ten years or so, face recognition has become a 
popular area of research in computer vision and one of the 
most successful applications of image analysis and 
understanding. Because of the nature of the problem, not only 
computer science researchers are interested in it, but 
neuroscientists and psychologists also. It is the general 
opinion that advances in computer vision research will 
provide useful insights to neuroscientists and psychologists 
into how human brain works, and vice versa [1].The goal is to 
implement the system (model) for a particular face and 
distinguish it from a large number of stored faces with some 
real-time variations as well. It gives us efficient way to find 
the lower dimensional space. Further this algorithm can be 
extended to recognize the gender of a person or to interpret 
the facial expression of a person. Recognition could be 
carried out under widely varying conditions like frontal view, 
a 45° view, scaled frontal view, subjects with spectacles etc 
are tried, while the training data set covers limited views. The 
algorithm models the real-time varying lighting conditions as 
well. But this is out of scope of the current implementation. 
The aim of this research paper is to study and develop an 
efficient MATLAB program for face recognition using 
principal component analysis and to perform test for program 
 
 
optimization and accuracy. This approach is preferred due to 
its simplicity, speed and learning capability [2].  
 
II. FACE RECOGNITION PROCESS 
 
One of the simplest and most effective PCA approaches used 
in face recognition systems is the so-called eigenface 
approach. This approach transforms faces into a small set of 
essential characteristics, eigenfaces, which are the main 
components of the initial set of learning images (training set). 
Recognition is done by projecting a new image in the 
eigenface subspace, after which the person is classified by 
comparing its position in eigenface space with the position of 
known individuals [3]. The advantage of this approach over 
other face recognition systems is in its simplicity, speed and 
insensitivity to small or gradual changes on the face. The 
problem is limited to files that can be used to recognize the 
face. Namely, the images must be vertical frontal views of 
human faces. The whole recognition process involves two 
steps: 
A. Initialization process  
B. Recognition process 
The Initialization process involves the following operations:  
i. Acquire the initial set of face images called as training set.  
ii. Calculate the Eigenfaces from the training set, keeping 
only the highest eigenvalues. These M images define the 
face space. As new faces are experienced, the eigenfaces 
can be updated or recalculated.  
iii. Calculate distribution in this M-dimensional space for 
each known person by projecting his or her face images 
onto this face-space. 
These operations can be performed from time to time 
whenever there is a free excess operational capacity. This 
data can be cached which can be used in the further steps 
eliminating the overhead of re-initializing, decreasing 
execution time thereby increasing the performance of the 
entire system [4]. 
Having initialized the system, the next process involves the 
steps:  
i. Calculate a set of weights based on the input image and the 
M eigenfaces by projecting the input image onto each of 
the Eigenfaces. 
ii. Determine if the image is a face at all (known or unknown) 
by checking to see if the image is sufficiently close to a 
―free space‖.  
iii.  If it is a face, then classify the weight pattern as either a 
known person or as unknown.  
iv. Update the eigenfaces or weights as either a known or 
unknown, if the same unknown person face is seen 
several times then calculate the characteristic weight 
Face Recognition Using Principal Component Analysis Method 
 
Liton Chandra Paul1 , Abdulla Al Sumam2
 
Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering1,2 
Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology 
 


--- Page 2 ---
ISSN: 2278 – 1323 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET) 
Volume 1, Issue 9, November 2012 
 
 
136 
 
pattern and incorporate into known faces. The last step is 
not usually a requirement of every system and hence the 
steps are left optional and can be implemented as when 
the there is a requirement.   
 
III. EIGENFACE ALGORITHM 
Let a face image Γ(x, y) be a two dimensional M by N array 
of intensity values. In this thesis, I used a set of image by 200 
× 149 pixels. An image may also be considered as a vector of 
dimension M × N, so that a typical image of size 200 × 149 
becomes a vector of dimension 29,800 or equivalently a point 
in a 29,800 dimensional space. 
                                            
 
Fig-1:Conversion of M × N image into MN ×1 vector 
 
Step1: prepare the training faces 
Obtain face images I1, I2, I3, I4 , . . . . . . IM  (training faces). The 
face images must be centered and of the same size. 
 
Step 2: Prepare the data set 
Each face image Ii in the database is transformed into a vector 
and placed into a training set S. 
  
In My example M = 34. Each image is transformed into a 
vector of size MN × 1 and placed into the set. For simplicity, 
the face images are assumed to be of size N × N resulting in a 
point in 
dimensional space. An ensemble of images, then, 
maps to a collection of points in this huge space. 
 
Step 3: compute the average face vector 
The average face vector (Ψ) has to be calculated by using the 
following formula: 
 
 
Step 4: Subtract the average face vector 
The average face vector 
 is subtracted from the 
original faces 
and the result stored in the variable 
 , 
                           
 
 
Step 5: Calculate the covariance matrix 
We obtain the covariance matrix C in the following manner,  
                 
 
                   
            (
 Where, 
A=
 
                                                 (
) 
 
Step 6: Calculate the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the 
covariance matrix 
The covariance matrix C in step 5 has a dimensionality of  
 , so one would have 
 eigenface and eigenvalues. 
For a 256 × 256 image that means that on must compute a 65, 
536 × 65, 536 matrix and calculate 65,536 eigenfaces. 
Computationally, this is not very efficient as most of those 
eigenfaces are not useful for our task. In general, PCA is used 
to describe a large dimensional space with a relative small set 
of vectors [3].  
Compute the eigenvectors 
 of  
 
The matrix 
 is very large            not practical!!! 
 
 Step 6.1: consider the matrix 
                                  
  (M × M matrix) 
 
Step 6.2: compute eigenvectors 
 of L= 
 
 
       What is the relationship between 
 and  
 ? 
                
   
               
   
     
    [ since  
] 
                   
          where, 
 Thus, 
 and 
have the same eigenvalues and their 
eigenvectors are related as follows:           
 
Note 1:  
can have upto
 eigenvalues and 
eigenvectors. 
Note 2: 
 can have upto M eigenvalues and 
eigenvectors. 
Note 3: The M eigenvalues of
 (along with their 
corresponding eigenvectors) correspond to the M largest 
eigenvalues of 
 (along with their corresponding 
eigenvectors). 
Where 
 is an eigenvector of L =
. From this simple 
proof we can see that 
 is an eigenvector of 
. 
The M eigenvectors of L =
 are used to find the M 
eigenvectors 
 of C that form our eigenface basis: 
 
Where, 
 are the Eigenvectors i.e. Eigenfaces. 
 
Step 7: keep only K eigenvectors (corresponding to the K 
largest eigenvalues) 
Eigenfaces with low eigenvalues can be omitted, as they 
explain only a small part of Characteristic features of the 
faces. 
IV. PROJECTION OF TRAINING SAMPLES 
INTO THE EIGENFACE SPACE 
Next we have to project the training sample into the 
Eigenface space. The feature weight for the training images 
can be calculated by the following formula: 


--- Page 3 ---
ISSN: 2278 – 1323 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET) 
Volume 1, Issue 9, November 2012 
 
137 
All Rights Reserved © 2012 IJARCET 
 
 
Where, 
 is the ith Eigenfaces and i=1, 2, 3 . . . . . .K. The 
weight is obtained as above form a vector as follows 
 
 
 
V. TESTING SAMPLE CLASSIFICATIONS 
 
a)  Read the test image and separate face from it.  
b)  Calculate the feature vector of the test face. 
The test image is transformed into its eigenface components. 
First we compare line of our input image with our mean 
image and multiply their difference with each eigenvectors 
[2]. Each value would represent a weight and would be saved 
on a vector 
  
 
Where, 
 is the ith Eigenfaces and i=1, 2, 3 . . . . . .K. 
 
c)  Compute the average distance (Euclidean distance) 
between test feature vector and all the training feature 
vectors. 
Mathematically, recognition is finding the minimum 
Euclidean distance 
  , between a testing point and a training 
point given in the following equation 
 
Where, i = 1, 2, 3. . . . . . K. The Euclidean distance between 
two weight vectors thus provides a measurement of similarity 
between the corresponding images.   
d)  The face class with minimum Euclidian distance shows 
similarity to test image [5]. 
 
VI. SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM & 
FLOWCHART 
       Fig-2: Schematic diagram of a face recognizer  
 
 
 
VII.  EXPERIMENTAL RESULT 
 
This article represents some computational results of our 
program. In Experimental result-1 and Experimental result-2, 
both test image and equivalent image which is stored in 
database have same pose. But test image and equivalent 
image have different in pose which are shown in 
Experimental result-3 and Experimental result-4.    
 
Experimental Result-1(having same pose) 
 
 
 
Experimental Result-2(having same pose) 


--- Page 4 ---
ISSN: 2278 – 1323 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET) 
Volume 1, Issue 9, November 2012 
 
 
138 
 
 
 Fig-3: The Recognition of Individual Images                    
having Same Pose 
Experimental Result-3 (having pose variation) 
 
Experimental Result-4 (having pose variation) 
 
Figure-4: The Recognition of Individual Images having Pose 
variation 
 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
In this thesis we implemented the face recognition system 
using Principal Component Analysis and Eigenface 
approach. The system successfully recognized the human 
faces and worked better in different conditions of face 
orientation.  
In this research, Principal component analysis approach to 
the face recognition problem was studied and a face 
recognition system based on the eigenfaces approach was 
proposed. The algorithm has been tested for the image 
database ETE-07 series, RUET and implemented using 
MATLAB. The algorithm developed in a generalized one 
which works well with any type of images. The tests 
conducted on Bitmap images, PNG images and JPEG images 
of various subjects in different poses showed that this method 
gave very good classification of faces though it has 
limitations over the variations in size of image. The eigenface 
approach thus provides a practical solution that is well fitted 
to the problem of face recognition. It is fast, relatively simple 
and has been shown to work well in constrained 
environment. 
 
IX. FUTURE PLAN 
 
In this thesis paper, we worked with some still pictures but 
we will try to develop a system using video camera that will 
work with real time face recognition. Here we used 36 face 
images of 18 persons of ETE-07 series, RUET but in future 
we would like to work with huge database. We want to 
overcome the problem of different size face image 
recognition. We will compare the performance analysis of 
PCA based method with all others existing face recognition 
methods.   
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]. http://www.face-rec.org 
[2]. Shemi P M, Ali M A, A Principal Component Analysis 
Method for Recognition of Human Faces: Eigenfaces 
Approach, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Electronics 
Communication 
and 
Computer 
Technology 
(IJECCT),Volume 2 Issue 3 (May 2012). 
[3]. M. Turk, A. Pentland: Face Recognition using 
Eigenfaces, Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition, 3 – 6 June 1991, Maui, HI , USA, pp. 586 – 
591. 
[4]. Prof. Y. Vijaya Lata , Chandra Kiran Bharadwaj 
Tungathurthi , H. Ram Mohan Rao , Dr. A. Govardhan , 
Dr. L. P.  Reddy, 
Facial 
Recognition 
using 
Eigenfaces 
by 
PCA,  
Department of Computer Science and  Engineering, 
Gokaraju 
Rangaraju 
Institute 
of 
Engg&Tech,  
Jawaharlal Nehru Tech. University. 
[5]. Parvinder S. Sandhu, Iqbaldeep Kaur, Amit Verma, 
Samriti Jindal, Inderpreet Kaur, Shilpi Kumari, Face 
Recognition Using Eigen face Coefficients and Principal 
Component Analysis, International Journal on Electrical 
and Electronics Engineering 3:8 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 5 ---
ISSN: 2278 – 1323 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET) 
Volume 1, Issue 9, November 2012 
 
139 
All Rights Reserved © 2012 IJARCET 
 
AUTHORS PROFILE 
 
First Author: Liton Chandra Paul 
completed his B.Sc. in Electronics & Telecommunication 
Engineering (ETE) from Rajshahi University of Engineering 
& Technology (RUET), Bangladesh, in 2012. Currently, he 
is a lecturer of Electronics and Communication Engineering 
department at the University of Information Technology &  
Sciences (UITS), Bangladesh. He  has two international 
conference paper and one national conference paper. His 
research interests include Mobile communication, Wireless 
& Satellite Communication, Image Processing, Digital Signal 
Processing, Digital Communication, Data Communication. 
 
 
                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                          Second Author: Abdulla Al Suman 
received his B.Sc. in Electronics & Telecommunication 
Engineering (ETE) from Rajshahi University of Engineering 
& Technology (RUET), Bangladesh, in 2010.  He  is 
pursuing his M.Sc. in EEE from RUET. Currently, he is a 
lecturer of ETE at the RUET. He has 2 int’l journal and 2 int’l 
conference paper. His research interests include Wireless 
Communication, 
Image 
Processing, 
Digital 
Signal 
Processing, 
Information 
Theory, 
and 
Digital 
Communication. 
 
 
