--- Page 1 ---
IOT Based Smart Security and Smart Home 
Automation 
  
 
1 Sudha Kousalya
 
Assistant Professor
 
Dept. of  ECE 
 
Aditya College of Engineering 
Madanapalle ,Chittoor , India 
 
2. G. Reddi Priya
 
Student  
Dept. of  ECE 
Aditya College of Engineering   
Madanapalle ,Chittoor, , India
 
 
3 R.
 
Vasanthi
 
Student
  
Dept.
 
of  ECE
 
Aditya College of Engineering  
 
Madanapalle ,Chittoor, , India 
 
4  B Venkatesh  
Student  
Dept. of  ECE 
Aditya College of Engineering   
Madanapalle ,Chittoor, , India
 
Abstract—“ Internet of Things” is fast becoming a disruptive 
technology business opportunity, with standards emerging 
primarily for wireless communication between devices and 
gadgets in day to day human life, in general refered to as Things. 
This project aims at controlling home appliances and building a 
smart 
wireless 
home 
security 
system 
using 
Wi-Fi 
as 
communication protocol. The Home Automation can be 
implemented using different types of wireless communication 
techniques such as ZigBee, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, GSM, etc. These 
existing methods have drawbacks as they work in short range. To 
overcome this  drawbacks, we are going to implement this project 
“IOT based Smart security and Smart Home Automation”. The 
project focuses on controlling lights and fans referred as Home 
Automation and providing Smart security by sending an captured 
image through an E-mail to the owner using internet when an 
object is detected. By using “Node MCU” Module we are going to 
implement this project. This will be more helpful for Handicapped 
and aged people. 
 
Keywords—  IOT, Arduino, Node MCU , WI-FI, Smart phone. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
  Home automation refers to handling and controlling home 
appliances by using micro-controller or computer technology. 
Automation is popular now days because it provides ease, 
security and efficiency. In this, a sensor senses the status of 
appliances and updates to web server. If user is far away from 
home, he can access and change status of appliances i.e. 
switches it on/off. User can use local PC. This paper will 
describe approach of controlling home appliances by using 
web server. 
This IOT based smart security and smart home automation 
systems are trying to achieve comfort combined with 
simplicity. Wireless Home security and Home automation are 
the dual aspects of this project. The currently built prototype of 
the system sends alerts to the owner over E-mail using the 
Internet if any sort of human movement is sensed near the 
entrance of his house .On the other hand if the owner identiﬁes 
that the person entering his house is not an intruder but an 
unexpected guest of his then  the user/owner can  make 
arrangements such  as opening the door, switching on various 
appliances inside the house, which are also connected and 
controlled by the micro-controller in the system to welcome 
his guest. The same can be done when the user himself enters 
the room and by virtue of the system he can make 
arrangements from his doorstep such that as soon as he enters 
his house he can make himself at full comfort without 
manually having to switch on the electrical appliances or his 
favorite T.V. channel for an example. Thus using the same set 
of sensors the dual problems of home security and home 
automation can be solved on a complementary basis. One of 
the main advantage of this IOT is even though Wi-Fi is not 
available we can go through 3G or 4G services. In other 
existing methods it is not possible so, by overcoming all the 
drawbacks we have implemented a project IOT based Smart 
security and Smart Home Automation. This project provides 
more comfort combined with simplicity. 
 
II. 
EXISTING METHODS 
A. Bluetooth based home automation system 
 
Home automation systems using smartphone, Arduino 
board and Bluetooth technology are secured and low cost. A 
Bluetooth based home automation system proposed by 
R.Piyare and M.Tazil [2]. The Bluetooth system uses a PC or 
smartphone as receiver device. It has a high communication 
rate, great security and low cost, so it can be implemented as a 
real time system. Bluetooth network has limited range of 10 
meters if the smartphone is out of range, then it will not be able 
to control the home appliances, this is one of the main 
disadvantages of Bluetooth based home automation system 
B. Voice recognition based home automation 
 
A voice recognition based home automation system 
proposed and implemented by a researcher [3]. The wireless 
communication between the smartphone and the Arduino UNO 
is done through Bluetooth technology. This will be more 
helpful for handicapped and aged people who wants to control 
appliances by speaking voice command The main drawback of 
this system is that communication between user and voice 
recognition tool depends on signal to noise ratio (SNR), if 
voice signal is noisy then communication can highly effect and 
the system will fail to show accuracy. 
 
 
International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT)
ISSN: 2278-0181
http://www.ijert.org
IJERTV7IS040026
(This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.)
Published by :
www.ijert.org
Vol. 7 Issue 04,  April-2018
43


--- Page 2 ---
C. ZigBee Based Wireless Home Automation System 
 
ZigBee based wireless home automation system has also 
been studied [4], ZigBee is similar to Bluetooth technology. It 
is one of the broadly used transceiver standard with low data 
rate and power. It has physical range is between 10 to 20 
meters, which can increase up to 150 meters by using direct 
sequence spread spectrum (DSSS). It is ideal for developing 
prototypes and research related activities. 
D. GSM Based Home Automation System 
 
A smart home automation system implemented by using 
Global System for Mobile communication (GSM) [5]. In GSM 
based home automation systems, communication between main 
module and appliances is done through text messages. The 
main drawback of GSM based home automation system is that, 
there is no guarantee text message deliver to the system every 
time so it is not a reliable system. 
 
These are the drawbacks of existing methods, To           
       overcome  that drawbacks we are implementing “IOT         
       Based Smart  security and Smart Home Automation”. 
III. 
COMPONENTS REQUIRED 
A. 
Arduino UNO, Node MCU 
B. 
Relays for connecting home appliances,  
C. 
Air purity Sensor(MQ135)  
D. 
Humidity and Temperature(DHT11) 
E. 
IR Sensor 
F. 
Camera module(OV7670) 
G. 
Mobile phone to operate home appliances and   
Blink app in mobile phone to see results. 
H. 
Arduino IDE (Software) 
 
A.  ARDUINO UNO 
 
Arduino Uno is a microcontroller board based on the 
ATmega328 (datasheet).it has 14 digital input/output pins 
(of which 6 can be used as PWM outputs),6 analog inputs, a 
16 MHz crystal oscillator, a USB connection, a power jack, 
an ICSP header, and a reset button.it contains everything 
needed to support the microcontroller, simply connect it to a 
computer with a USB cable or power it with a AC-to-DC 
adapter or battery to get started. It’s operating voltage is 5v 
and DC current per I/O pin is 40mA and DC current for 3.3v 
pin is 50mA and it is having 2kb of SRAM and !kb of 
EEPROM and it’s clock speed is 16MHz. 
 
Fig.1 Arduino UNO 
B.  NODE MCU 
 Node MCU is an open source IOT platform. It includes 
firmware 
which 
runs 
on 
the ESP8266 Wi-Fi 
SOC from Espressif Systems, and hardware which is based on 
the ESP-12 module. The term "Node MCU" by default refers 
to the firmware rather than the dev kits. It’s having 128KBytes 
of memory and its storage space is 4Mbytes and power is 
supplied through an USB and it is a single board 
microcontroller and also it is having 16 GPIO pins. 
 
 
Fig.2 Node MCU 
 
C.  IR SENSOR 
 
Fig.3 IR Sensor 
An infrared sensor is an electronic instrument which is used 
to sense certain characteristics of its surroundings by either 
emitting and/or detecting infrared radiation. Infrared sensors ar
e also capable of measuring the heat being emitted by an object 
and detecting motion. Definition and relationship to the  
electromagnetic spectrum. Infrared radiation extends from the 
nominal 
red 
edge 
of 
the 
visible 
spectrum 
at 700 
nanometers (nm) to 1 mm. This range of wavelengths 
corresponds to a frequency range of approximately 430 THz 
down to 300 GHz. 
D.   RELAY BOARD 
 
Fig.4 Relay board 
A relay is an electromagnetic switching device consisting of 
an armature which is moved by an electromagnet to operate 
International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT)
ISSN: 2278-0181
http://www.ijert.org
IJERTV7IS040026
(This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.)
Published by :
www.ijert.org
Vol. 7 Issue 04,  April-2018
44


--- Page 3 ---
one or more switch contacts. Some advantages of relays are 
that they provide amplification and isolation and are straight 
forward. Here we are using 5v 4-channel relay interface board, 
and each channel needs a 15-20mA driver current.it can be 
used to control various appliances and equipment with large 
current relays that work under AC250V 10A or DC30V 10A.it 
has a standard interface that can be controlled directly by 
microcontroller. 
E.   AIR PURITY CHECKING SENSOR 
 
Fig.5 Air checking purity sensor (MQ135) 
The MQ series of gas sensors utilizes a small heater inside 
with an electro chemical sensor these sensors are sensitive to a 
range of gasses are used at room temperature. MQ135 alcohol 
sensor is a Sno2 with a lower conductivity of clean air. When 
the target explosive gas exists, then the sensor’s conductivity 
increases more 
increasing 
more 
along 
with 
the 
gas 
concentration rising levels. By using simple electronic circuits, 
it converts the charge of conductivity to correspond output 
signal of gas concentration. 
F.  HUMIDITY AND TEMPERATURE SENSOR 
 
Fig.6 Humidity and temperature sensor (DHT11) 
Humidity sensors detect the relative humidity of the 
immediate environments in which they are placed. They 
measure both the moisture and temperature in the air and 
express relative humidity as a percentage of the ratio of 
moisture in the air to the maximum amount that can be held in 
the air at the current temperature. As air becomes hotter, it 
holds more moisture, so the relative humidity changes with the 
temperature. 
Most humidity sensors use capacitive measurement to 
determine the amount of moisture in the air. This type of 
measurement relies on two electrical conductors with a non-
conductive polymer film laying between them to create an 
electrical field between them. Moisture from the air collects on 
the film and causes changes in the voltage levels between the 
two plates. This change is then converted into a digital 
measurement of the air’s relative humidity after taking the air 
temperature into account 
 
 
 
G.  CAMERA MODULE 
 
Fig.7 Camera module (OV7670) 
 
The camera module is powered from a single +3.3V power 
supply. An external oscillator provide the clock source for 
camera module XCLK pin. With proper configuration to the 
camera internal registers via I2C bus, then the camera supply 
pixel clock (PCLK) and camera data back to the host with 
synchronize signal like HREF and VSYNC. The OV7670 
camera module is a low cost 0.3 mega pixel CMOS colour 
camera module, it can output 640x480 VGA resolution image 
at 30fps. The OV7670 camera module build in on board LDO 
regulator only single 3.3V power needed and can be used in 
Arduino, STM32,Chipkit, ARM, DSP ,FPGA and etc.. 
IV. PROPOSED SYSTEM 
The proposed system is implemented using Node MCU by 
overcoming all the drawbacks of previous existing methods In 
this project all the sensors are connected to the Node MCU 
board and the results can be seen in Smart phone. For every 
second it shows new value. If any gas leakage happens the 
value of air purity sensor shows the high value at that time we 
can turn on the fan to send the gas out. The camera module is 
connected to the Arduino UNO board because in Node MCU 
board we have only one analog pin For camera module we will 
use more analog pins, so we are connecting camera module to 
Arduino UNO. When IR sensor detects the motion, the camera 
module will be turned on. The captured images will be stored 
in folder of our PC and , it sends Captured  images to the user 
email. 
 
Fig 8  Block diagram 
 
WORKING OF PROTOTYPE 
The prototype can be used in following two ways: 
a. As a smart security system 
b. As a smart home automation system 
c. Environment monitoring 
 
 
International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT)
ISSN: 2278-0181
http://www.ijert.org
IJERTV7IS040026
(This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.)
Published by :
www.ijert.org
Vol. 7 Issue 04,  April-2018
45


--- Page 4 ---
a.  As a smart security system 
 
If we place a IR sensor at the entrance of a building. 
These sensors as explained earlier detect the motion of 
obstacle. This signal which detects their presence becomes the 
input trigger for the micro-controller. The owner, who may or 
may not be present in that building, will  receive an image 
captured by an camera module through an E-mail on  his  
mobile phone (whose Mail  is predeﬁned in the program) 
stating that ’There is an Intruder in the House’. To turn ON the 
lights and fans , so that the intruder will be warned, the owner 
can press ’1’ from his mobile keypad. Moreover if the owner 
ﬁnds that his building is not safe, he can send an SMS to the 
concerned authority to police department explaining his 
situation. 
b. As a smart home automation system 
 
Under the Home Automation we can control all electrical 
appliances from long distance through an mobile phone. In this 
project we are controlling Lights and Fans through an Internet 
.Even though if Wi-Fi is not available we can go to 3G or 4G 
services to operate the system. This will helps us to operate our 
home appliances through a long distance. This will helps the 
handicapped and aged people to control their home appliances 
easily. 
c.  Environment monitoring 
Under this environment monitoring, we are using DHT11 
and MQ135 sensors. These two sensors are more useful to 
know about weather condition, In this project we are placing 
these two sensors inside the home to know the weather 
condition of our home. Here DHT11 sensor shows the values 
of humidity and temperature and MQ135 sensor checks the air 
purity if any poiseness gas is mixed , For every second it will 
shows the new value in our mobile phone. If the temperature or 
air impurity becomes high at that time we can switch on fans to 
send that air outside. 
ADVANTAGES 
  1. This low cost system with minimum requirements takes     
      Care of both home security as well as Home automation. 
  2.  More helpful for handicapped and aged people. 
  3.  Devices can be controlled from long distance. 
  4.  Highly secured and Time saving. 
 
RESULT 
The results that have been obtained from the above set up 
can be seen in blink app that has been shown below. 
 
 
The captured image of OV7670 camera shall be stored in 
one folder of our PC and it sends the captured image to the user 
mail. 
 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE 
Internet of things based home automation system can only 
work in the presence of internet. The rapid growth of IoT 
devices brings concerns and benefits. Even though Wi-Fi is not 
available we can go to 3G or 4G services. This is one big 
advantage of IOT In this project, the use of a camera connected 
to the microcontroller might help the user in taking decision 
whether to welcome the guest after receiving the captured 
picture of the guest or intruder, If the user identifies he is an 
unknown person then the user can further forward the same 
photograph to the police station by explaining his situation. 
This project can also be implemented by using Raspberry.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Ravi Kishore kodali and Vishal jain “ IOT based smart   security 
and Home Automation system” International      conference on 
computing, communication  and      automation (ICCCA 2016) 
[2] 
R. Piyare and M. Tazil, "Bluetooth based home          automation 
system using cell phone," Consumer       Electronics (ISCE), 2011 
IEEE 15th International      Symposium on, Singapore, 2011, pp. 
192-195. 
[3] 
S. Sen, S. Chakrabarty, R. Toshniwal, A. Bhaumik,       “Design 
of an intelligent voice controlled home        automation system”, 
International Journal of       Computer Applications, vol. 121, 
no.15, pp. 39-42,   2015 
[4] 
H. AlShu'eili, G. S. Gupta and S. Mukhopadhyay,      "Voice 
recognition based wireless home automation       system," 
Mechatronics (ICOM), 2011 4th International      Conference On, 
Kuala Lumpur, 2011, pp. 1-6. 
[5] 
R. Teymourzadeh, Salah Addin Ahmed, Kok Wai      Chan and 
Mok Vee Hoong, "Smart GSM based Home      Automation 
System," Systems, Process & Control      (ICSPC), 2013 IEEE 
Conference on, Kuala Lumpur,       2013, pp. 306-309. 
[6] 
A. R. . C. Y. . O. K. Withanage, C., “A comparison of the popular 
home automation technologies,” pp. 1 – 11, may      2014 
 
International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT)
ISSN: 2278-0181
http://www.ijert.org
IJERTV7IS040026
(This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.)
Published by :
www.ijert.org
Vol. 7 Issue 04,  April-2018
46
