--- Page 1 ---
 
1 
INFINITE GROWTH:  A CURSE OR A BLESSING? 
 
Gennady Shkliarevsky 
 
 
Abstract:  The article discusses the controversy over infinite growth.  It analyzes the two 
dominant perspectives on economic growth and finds them based on a limited and 
subjective view of reality.  An examination of the principal aspects of economic growth--
economic activity, value, and value creation—helps to understand what fuels economic 
growth.  The article also discusses the correlations between production, consumption, as 
well as resources and population dynamics.  The article finds that infinite and exponential 
economic growth is essential for the survival (conservation) of our economy and 
civilization.  
 
Key words:  Economic growth, technological innovation, Solow, entropy, equilibration, 
production of disequilibrium, value creation, environmental degradation, and 
“Malthusian Loop.” 
 
DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.33330.89287 
 
Introduction:  To Grow or Not to Grow 
 
There is a well-known tale related to the game of chess.  The ruler wanted to reward the 
inventor and asked him to name his price.  The inventor requested what seemed to be a 
ridiculously small remuneration.  He asked the ruler to place one grain of rice on the first 
square of the chessboard, then two grains on the second square, four on the third, and 
then to continue doubling the number of grains for each consecutive square all the way to 
the last.  The ruler agreed but soon realized that he could not possibly fulfill the request.  
By the 30th square the amount of rice that he would have to deliver exceeded all his grain 
reserves, but this was still way less than the amount that was due for the last square.   
 
The tale is most likely made-up, but it teaches an important lesson:  exponential growth is 
a powerful force.  In the words attributed to Albert Einstein in another apocryphal story, 
“compound interest is the most powerful force in the universe.”  The subject of both 
stories is growth, more specifically exponential growth.   
 
The relevance of exponential growth is very broad.  In one form or another, it relates to 
many spheres of our life, and none of them is more important than the economy.  There 
are many issues in the world today that are related to the problem of economic growth.  
This problem comes up in discussions of climate change, the degradation of the 
environment, the growing inequality, racial relations, gender discrimination, health, 
education, and much else.  We hear about the problem of economic growth from 
politicians, religious leaders, media personalities, and even around dinner tables.  
Economic growth seems to be relevant to everything and everyone. 
 


--- Page 2 ---
 
2 
As is common with such important subjects, the problem of economic growth is divisive.  
It generates heated arguments among scholars, business people, political activists, and 
common citizens.  There are those who unequivocally support economic growth and 
those who are just as unequivocally opposed to it; and then there is everyone in-between.  
The point of contention in all these disagreements is whether we can afford an infinite 
exponential growth or not.  For centuries our economic growth has been the source of 
pride in human genius.  Humans believed in economic progress.  Infinite growth was the 
goal they have relentlessly pursued.  Today we seem to have reached a critical point in 
our relentless pursuit of growth.  The main question is whether we remain committed to 
infinite growth or whether we should abandon this commitment. 
 
This article will address the controversy over infinite growth.  It will discuss and 
critically examine the main perspectives on infinite growth that currently dominate the 
public discourse.  It will analyze the theoretical foundation for their respective visions, or 
what each of these perspectives holds as self-evident truths.  These “truths” are not 
specific to economics and economic systems; they are concepts and notions--such as 
entropy, chaos, order, and others—that are relevant to many natural sciences, social 
sciences, and other fields of knowledge.  The article will also address specifically 
economic issues by reviving familiar questions:  What is economic activity?  What are 
value and value creation?  What is the source of economic growth?  Finally, since this 
article is largely about a disagreement, it will outline a perspective that resolves this 
controversy and will provide a definitive answer to the fundamental question that is on 
the mind of all who are involved in it:  to grow or not to grow? 
 
 
The Controversy Over Infinite Growth 
 
There are many diverse views on growth that are discussed by economists, business 
leaders, and lay individuals.  Despite their diversity, these views come down to two basic 
perspectives.  One perspective rejects infinite growth.  It argues that infinite growth will 
deplete resources, ruin the environment, and may ultimately lead to the destruction of our 
civilization and the planet.  The other perspective sees infinite growth as the only 
possible way to sustain our economy and civilization.  To a non-partisan observer, both 
perspectives make important points but they also generate confusion and bring a fair 
share of contradictions into discussions of growth. 
 
 
The Fallacy Argument 
 
The perspective that argues against infinite growth rests on one categorical statement, 
according to which nature imposes fundamental constraints on economic growth.  
Opponents of infinite growth emphasize that there are ultimate limits to the size of human 
population, production, and consumption that our environment and its resources can 
support.  This statement relies on one fundamental scientific fact about dissipation of 
energy, or entropy production.  As formulated in the Second Law of Thermodynamics, 
the level of entropy production can never be below zero.  According to this law, all 


--- Page 3 ---
 
3 
resources, including free energy (energy available to do work), will eventually become 
unusable due to depletion. 
 
Human civilization is a dissipative system.  Our economic system consumes low entropy 
in the environment and produces high entropy.  High entropy manifests itself in different 
ways:  either as scarcity of resources, including energy, unavailability of sinks (the 
capacity of the environment to process waste), or in some other way.  But whatever form 
entropy production takes, high levels of entropy will make our environment very hostile 
to human life or even completely unsuitable for biological organisms. 
 
The connection between the Second Law of Thermodynamics and economic 
development emerged at the beginning of the 1970s when Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen 
published his now famous book The Entropy Law and the Economic Process.1  Since 
then many new studies on this subject have appeared that both support and reject the 
validity of the connection between entropy production, economics, and sustainability.   
 
Critics of infinite growth point to the inevitable march of entropy production to make an 
argument that the pursuit of infinite growth is simply a fallacy that disregards 
fundamental laws of nature.2  Christopher Jones, a senior sustainability scientist in the 
Julie Ann Wrigley Global Institute of Sustainability at Arizona State University, writes 
that the model of infinite growth has a fundamental flaw and is dangerously delusional.3 
Numerous other researchers and environmental activists have variably called infinite 
growth a fairytale,4 a pipe dream,5 a delusion,6 and a myth7--and these are just some of 
the milder characterizations.  John Cairns is a typical representative of the anti-growth 
perspective.  In his article characteristically entitled  “The Age of Transition to 
Sustainability:  The End of the Exponential Growth Period” Cairns writes: 
 
Human technology, creativity, and ingenuity may modify natural laws, but 
cannot be used to repeal them. Attempts to maintain the recent exponential 
growth of the human population, affluence, and artifacts cannot continue 
forever, or probably even for another century.8 
 
Cairns sees only one option:  to end exponential growth.9   
 
Despite their categorical pronouncements, however, the position of the opponents of 
infinite growth is not unproblematic.  Although they argue that entropy production cannot 
be stopped and the demise of humanity is inevitable, they also make every effort to 
convince others that the policies they propose and recommendations they make can work 
and, if not to avert the inevitable consequences completely, at least delay them and make 
them more tolerable.  Cairns, for example, does not see that ending growth will 
ultimately save human civilization and its environment, but he is perfectly comfortable 
with what he sees as an opportunity to “improve the quality of life for future generations 
of humans and the other life forms, an opportunity that is far greater than possible with 
present unsustainable practices.”10 
 


--- Page 4 ---
 
4 
One can draw analogy with the medical profession.  Doctors are certainly not trying to 
convince us there we can live forever, but they do try to prolong our advance to the 
inevitable end and make it less painful.  The analogy works but only to a degree.  The 
policies and recommendations made by the opponents of infinite growth are not without 
pain of their own.  Reducing population and limiting production and consumption will 
certainly inflict pain, particularly for the average person.  What do we have to do to 
drastically reduce the number of people who live on our planet?  What would we have to 
endure without many modern conveniences to which we have gotten so accustomed?  
What do we do about those who are currently employed in industries that will have to 
disappear?  These are certainly important questions for which the opponents of growth 
have no clear answer. 
  
Cairns, for example, recognizes that enforcing limits on population will be painful and 
most people would oppose them.  However, he argues, “ . . . if activities that decrease 
population are not chosen, nature will do so indiscriminately.”11 Melissa Mayer also 
points to numerous adverse consequences of population growth.12   The ambiguity of 
these answers increases tensions and conflicts that do not appear to have any solution 
other than political enforcement. 
 
 
The Technological Panacea 
 
Supporters of the pro-growth perspective are just as forceful and categorical in their 
arguments as their opponents.  They view the anti-growth stance as profoundly “anti-
scientific, anti-empirical, and anti-rational.”  In a derisive comment, one advocate of 
growth characterizes this stance as “ancient superstition embodied in an ancient 
‘argument from incredulity,’ prettied up with some modern ‘save the planet’ lipstick.”13  
According to another commentator, there is no alternative to huge increases in economic 
growth.  He writes: 
 
Contrary to our strong intuitions, infinite economic growth is both 
logically and practically possible on our finite planet, and utterly 
necessary if we want to provide every person on Earth with a decent 
lifestyle.   We should not be taken in by prophecies to the contrary, which 
have come and gone since the beginning of human progress itself.14 
 
A message that is typical for the proponents of growth is short and curt:  “Our baseline 
expectation should be no less than exponential growth.”15  For Tim Harford, the author of 
The Undercover Economist Strikes Back:  How to Run--or Ruin--an Economy, the 
promise of growth meets the expectation of every generation to live better than its 
parents’ generation:  “More growth is better, period.”16  Max Roser, another critic of the 
anti-growth perspective, the goods and services that we all need 
 
. . . are not just there--they need to be produced--and growth means that 
their quality and quantity increases.  Good health, a place to live, access to 


--- Page 5 ---
 
5 
education, nutrition, social connections, respect, peace, human rights, a 
healthy environment, happiness.17 
 
The modern pro-growth perspective goes back to the 1950s when the economy in 
America and the world was rapidly expanding, promising an even better outlook for the 
future.  Robert M. Solow, one of the early expounders of this perspective, has done more 
than any other thinker to shape growth theory.  In several articles that he published in 
1956 and 1957 Solow argued that technological change and capital aggregation were two 
major factors that ensured future growth.18  One should note that Solow did not 
specifically refer to infinite growth.  However, he also did not dissociate himself from 
others who made such inferences based on his arguments.19   The perspective that has 
eventually been shaped by those who have followed in Solow’s steps unabashedly uses 
the term “infinite growth.”  A steady flow of contributions that popularize the pro-growth 
perspective continues to this day and makes this perspective one of the dominant factors 
in today’s economic theory and practice, enjoying particular popularity in the business 
community and among economists.20  Many business leaders and economists in China—
the greatest economic juggernaut in recent times—see technological innovation to be at 
the heart of China’s economic success story.  Analyzing the economic performance of 
several Chinese provinces that fuel much of the growth in China, Ying Liu and her co-
authors conclude that their success has been a result of constant technological innovation.  
They recommend to “elevate and celebrate” the model of growth through technological 
innovation in these provinces as the exemplary model for the rest of the Chinese 
economy.21  
 
At the heart of the pro-growth perspective lies the conviction that natural resources and 
consumption are not the primary factors that fuel economic progress.  According to the 
proponents of the growth model, economic progress is largely due to new ideas, 
knowledge creation, innovation, and the resulting capital accumulation.  Philippe Aghion 
and Peter Howitt have detailed this view in their piece entitled “Some Thoughts on 
Capital Accumulation, Innovation, and Growth.”22  For Matthew Johnston, a prolific 
contributor to Investopedia, “economic growth results from increasing knowledge and 
applying it to the world to do things better, to improve human welfare”; and the best 
thing, in his view, is that this growth does not depend on consumption or resources.  He 
and many who share his views see arguments against growth as a profoundly pessimistic 
admission that “we have already attained all usable knowledge, there is nothing more to 
learn” and that “increases in knowledge must come to a stop, now or soon”23—a view 
that they find unproven and unacceptable. 
 
The pro-growth perspective does not see any natural limits to the production of 
knowledge and, consequently, to economic progress that relies on new knowledge and 
ideas.  This perspective largely owes its existence to the view that entropy is irrelevant to 
knowledge production.24   Jeffrey Young is in many ways a typical representative of the 
pro-growth paradigm.  He fully subscribes to economic and technological determinism.  
For him, the problem of growth is primarily an economic (read market) and technological 
problem.  He sees the solution of this problem in technological innovation and market 
mechanism.  In his view, the earth is an open system that imports energy from the 


--- Page 6 ---
 
6 
cosmos.  Consequently, Young has no concerns about energy shortages.   His major, if 
not the only, preoccupation is scarcity of material resources.  And this problem, 
according to Young, can be addressed within the current economic structure aided by 
technology.  The market mechanism—mostly resource pricing—provides the solution.  
As he argues, “[i]n principal economic models . . . prices which signal relative resource 
scarcities are sufficient [to resolve the problem of scarcity].”25  Recovery and recycling 
have an important but mostly complementary role in his overall scheme.26  
 
The proponents of infinite growth do not see entropy as presenting a serious limitation to 
economic progress.  In their view, mental operations are not subject to the laws of 
entropy and, consequently, knowledge and ideas can significantly reduce and even 
reverse the production of entropy.27  Resource scarcity is not relevant to advanced 
economies that rely on knowledge.28  Growth advocates point out that “in the advanced 
economies per capita mineral consumption and energy consumption are both falling” and 
while their GDP steadily grows, “the portion of GDP represented by material 
consumption is becoming ever smaller.”29 
 
 
Critique of the Dominant Perspectives on Growth 
 
The two sides in the controversy over growth use very different principles for organizing 
their respective theoretical perspectives.  Entropy is the central concept for the opponents 
of infinite growth; they organize their perspective around entropy production.  The 
distinction between mental and material production that has its roots in traditional 
dualism is the main focus of the proponents of growth.  The two organizing principles 
cannot be more different, so different in fact that the two sides often appear to be talking 
past each other. 
 
Entropy is indeed a very important part of reality.  This fact is indisputable.  However, 
one can take exception from viewing entropy as ontologically primary and entropy 
production as the process that defines reality.  In popular opinion, entropy has a bad 
reputation.  Many see entropy leading ultimately to what is called “thermal death” that is 
commonly associated with the destruction of the universe.   This unfavorable view comes 
as a result of poor understanding of the important and complex role that entropy 
production plays in our universe.  First of all, entropy production does not destroy 
anything.  It simply dissipates energy from regions where energy density is high to 
regions where it is low.  “Thermal death” does not mean that energy is destroyed.  Even 
if our universe ever reaches this stage, which is a big if, energy will not disappear;  
“thermal death” simply means that the distribution of energy density throughout our 
universe will be even and no free energy—energy that can be used to perform work—will 
be available.  In an important way, entropy is not about destruction; it is about 
conservation. 
 
Entropy production is a form of equilibration.  However, the idea that equilibration 
produces equilibrium reflects a very limited understanding of the effects of equilibration.  
As a form of equilibration, energy dissipation equalizes energy levels and makes possible 


--- Page 7 ---
 
7 
for various entities to form permanent bonds, thus creating new combinations that offer 
new possibilities and degrees of freedom.  Such combinations represent new and more 
powerful levels of organization with more possibilities, more degrees of freedom, and 
access to new resources.  Power differential is about disequilibrium.  Thus energy 
dissipation, or equilibration, produces equilibrium at one level of organization but it also 
creates disequilibrium by generating a new and more powerful level of organization.  As 
has been argued elsewhere, the two aspects of this process—equilibration and the 
production of disequilibrium--are closely interrelated and are always in balance.30   
 
Many have made a theoretical argument that reality does not show any preference for 
either equilibration or the production of disequilibrium.31  Reality, they argue, is 
constantly in the process of evolution.  It is a dynamic system; and as all dynamic 
systems, it is never either in a state of equilibrium or in a state of disequilibrium, never 
random or ordered.  Dynamic systems are always in a state best characterized as being at 
“the edge of chaos”—a phrase coined by mathematician Doyne Farmer and popularized 
by Stuart Kauffman.32 
 
There is much empirical evidence that supports this theoretical view.  Indeed, one can 
find many examples when energy dissipation leads to the emergence of new levels and 
forms of organization of reality.  These new levels and forms of organization create new 
energy flows in a constant cycle of transformation.  For example, we can observe a 
constant cycle of change in our universe from states of reality associated with radiant 
energy (stars and galaxies) to states of reality associated with non-radiant energy (black 
holes, gravity, dark energy and matter, and others).  Equilibration and the production of 
disequilibrium are integral to this cycle. 
 
Astrophysicist Manasse Mbonye, for example, observes that “the universe is always in 
search of a dynamical equilibrium,”33 which indicates the presence of the interplay 
between states of equilibrium and disequilibrium.  Even though the currently dominant 
cosmological theory suggests that our universe emerged from some primordial state 
dominated by disequilibrium—the so-called Big Bang—this theory does not prohibit a 
possibility that this disequilibrium is not a product of equilibration at some other non-
radiant energy level.34  Therefore, there is little reason to think that at some point our 
universe was out of balance between equilibration and the production of disequilibrium. 
 
The conclusion is that neither equilibration nor the production of disequilibrium is 
ontologically primary.  One can see entropy as primary only if the process of which 
entropy production, or equilibration, is only one aspect is not central to one’s field of 
vision. 
 
The main problem of the anti-growth perspective is that it assigns primacy to entropy 
and, consequently, to equilibration.  There is no rational justification for this choice and 
there is plenty of empirical evidence that contradicts it.  Therefore, the organizing 
principle of the anti-growth is a result of a limited, subjective, and ultimately arbitrary 
view of reality, which makes the entire anti-growth perspective limited, subjective, and 
arbitrary.  One cannot rely on its conclusions and generalizations to guide our economic 


--- Page 8 ---
 
8 
policies.  The subjective nature of the anti-growth perspective makes it vulnerable to 
criticism.  As a result, this perspective cannot play a constructive role in resolving the 
controversy over infinite growth.  It only deepens this controversy and impedes its 
resolution. 
 
The distinction between mental and material production as ontologically different and 
separate is central to advocates of infinite growth.  This distinction has its roots in the 
Enlightenment tradition and is most succinctly expressed by Descartes who saw res 
cognitans and res extensa as ontologically different from each other.  This distinction 
constitutes the basis for the separation between the subject and the object that is canonical 
for those who follow in the Enlightenment tradition, the proponents of growth among 
them.  This dualism justifies their exemption of mental production from the ravages of 
entropy and supports their claims of the possibility of infinite growth.  The proponents of 
infinite growth argue that since mental operations are fundamentally different from 
physical operations and do not involve dissipation, the law of entropy does not apply to 
production of knowledge and ideas.  If the law of entropy does not apply, there is no 
limitation to mental production; and since economic growth relies primarily on the 
production of new knowledge and ideas and this production has no limitations, economic 
growth also does not have any limits and can be infinite. 
 
The current pro-growth perspective is vulnerable on several points.  First, the distinction 
the proponents of this perspective make mental and physical operations has no rational 
justification.  This distinction goes back to the traditional differentiation between the 
subject and the object that originates in the Enlightenment tradition and that the pro-
growth advocates have accepted uncritically.  What we call “subject” and “object” are not 
ontological entities; they are our mental constructs—mere analytical categories in the 
way we conceptualize our relationship with reality.  As analytical categories they 
represent the distinction we make between our mental constructs and our capacity to 
consciously reflect on these constructs and their interrelationship.  Both “subject” and 
“object” have the same source:  our mental operations.  Changes in the way we view 
reality are changes that occur in our mind. These changes ultimately reflect new 
connections among neurons and new configurations of neural circuits that constitute 
levels of mental organization.  In other words, the same process changes the “subject” 
and the “object.”  Therefore, assigning ontological significance to this distinction is 
utterly unwarranted. 
 
Mental operations originate in physical activities.  As Jean Piaget has shown in a number 
of his studies,35 interactions among functional sensory-motor operations create permanent 
mental images that open the path to mental operations.  In other words, our mental 
operations originate in physical operations.  As any other physical operation, sensory-
motor operations generate entropy.  Entropy is integral to the process that creates our 
mental functions.  Therefore, entropy production cannot be irrelevant to mental 
operations; it is totally relevant. 
 
The second point is that the understanding of entropy and entropy production by the 
proponents of growth is limited.  Entropy production is about depletion of resources and 


--- Page 9 ---
 
9 
resources come in very different forms.  A minor point is that mental operations do 
involve energy exchanges and, therefore, produce entropy in the most commonly 
recognized form as energy dissipation.  However, this form of entropy production is not 
the only and not even the most important one that is involved in mental operations.  
Energy exchanges in mental operations are relatively small and consequently the 
production of entropy is not particularly significant.  Depletion of resources takes another 
characteristic form specific to mental operations.  
 
Human mind is ultimately a product of the evolution.  The process of creation is central 
to this evolution.  As a product of the evolution, human mind follows the same pattern 
that it has inherited in the course of the evolution.  The process of creation involves 
equilibration; and equilibration generates entropy.  Therefore, equilibration involves 
depletion of resources.   
 
As any other process, equilibration requires resources that sustain it.  Equilibration feeds 
on disequilibrium.  Therefore, disequilibrium is its principal resource.  As equilibration 
proceeds at a given level of organization, the availability of this resource at this level 
diminishes; in other words this resource depletes and the depletion of a resource is what 
we call entropy production. 
 
Levels of organization consist of a certain number (n) of functional operations.  These 
operations connect with each other and form stable combinations.  Conservation is at the 
heart of creating these combinations.  Operations are forms of action; staying active is the 
main condition of conserving action.  The more active an operation is, the better it is 
conserved.  This condition is as true of mental operations as it is true for non-mental 
ones.  New combinations offer new possibilities, new degrees of freedom and, 
consequently, conserve the entities involved in these combinations.  The n-number of 
functional operations that combine with each other creates the n2-number of 
combinations, which represents an exponential growth. 
 
As equilibration proceeds and the number of new combinations grows, possibilities for 
new combinations diminish because a finite number n of functional operations can only 
produce the finite number n2 of combinations.  This growth is exponential and, therefore, 
the depletion of the resource is also exponential.  Thus, disequilibrium, or the resource 
that fuels equilibration at a given level of organization, diminishes, or in other words, like 
any other resource, this resource is used and depletes.  Although the form this depletion 
takes is different, in the sense of depletion of resources the human mind is no different 
than any other system in nature.  It does produce more commonly recognized form of 
entropy as energy dissipation.  However, and more importantly, it also produces its own 
specific form of depletion of resources, or entropy production. 
 
The depletion of possibilities for creating new combinations (knowledge and ideas) is not 
absolute.  It takes place at a given level of organization.  Conservation of new 
combinations requires regulation.  The level of organization that regulates newly created 
combinations is more powerful than the level of organization that sustains operations 
involved in these combinations.  This new global level of organization offers more 


--- Page 10 ---
 
10
possibilities, more degrees of freedom, and, consequently, is more powerful than the level 
of organization that sustains local interactions.  The emergence of the new and more 
powerful level of organization represents the rise of disequilibrium. 
 
The emergence of new levels of organization offers new possibilities.  A newly emerging 
level of organization requires stabilization and conservation.  The way to conserve this 
level of organization is to integrate it with the level from which it has emerged.  
Naturally, equilibration is the process that makes such integration possible.  The 
integration of the two levels leads to the differentiation of the global regulatory level that 
leads to further equilibration, creation of new combinations, and the rise of new 
knowledge and ideas.  Entropy production is involved in all these stages.  It is never 
absolute.  It is always relative to a given level of organization. 
 
There is also empirical evidence that supports the argument that entropy is relevant to 
mental operations that generate knowledge and new ideas.  Many observers have pointed 
out that the intensity of intellectual production over the course of human history has been 
uneven.  There have been periods—for example, during the 19th and the first half of the 
20th century—when the growth of intellectual production was very robust; and then there 
were also periods when intellectual production was slow.  For example, many have noted 
that the production of new knowledge in our time is slow.  Our civilization faces many 
problems today but there are very few new ideas and approaches to solve these 
problems.36   
 
In their insightful article “Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find? Nicholas Bloom and his 
collaborators challenge “a key assumption of many endogenous growth models that a 
constant number researchers can generate constant exponential growth.”37  Using a metric 
of “research productivity” that they have devised, they examine a number of areas where 
growth heavily depends on research and knowledge.  One example they provide relates to 
computing technology and Moore’s Law.38  Their findings show that the number of 
researchers needed to sustain Moore’s Law has increased 18-fold since 1971 and, 
consequently, productivity per researcher has fallen in the same proportion.  They have 
also looked in other directions to confirm their findings:  agricultural production, medical 
research, mortality and life expectance, new molecular entities, and aggregates for the 
economy as a whole.  Their robust results show that  
 
Taking the U.S. aggregate number as representative, research productivity 
falls in half every 13 years—ideas are getting harder and harder to find. 
Put differently, just to sustain constant growth in GDP per person, the U.S. 
must double the amount of research effort searching for new ideas every 
13 years to offset the increased difficulty of finding new ideas. 39 
 
The conclusion that research intellectual productivity is exponentially declining 
everywhere is indisputable and has been widely accepted.40 
 
To sum up, the ontological distinction that the proponents of growth make is not valid.  
Indeed, entropy production is just as relevant to levels of mental organization, as it is 


--- Page 11 ---
 
11
relevant to any non-mental level of organization.  It may differ in form but not in its 
substance and pattern.  The proponents of infinite growth are right in their claim that the 
production of new knowledge and ideas is not limited.  However, they are right for a 
wrong reason.  They are wrong in placing the production of knowledge into a special 
category as unaffected by entropy production.  Indeed, production of new knowledge and 
ideas is infinite.  However, it is not infinite because it is immune to entropy production, 
but it is infinite because it produces new levels of organization that is capable of 
maintaining the level of entropy production at zero.  
 
The proponents of infinite growth adopt dualism as self-evident truth, for which they 
provide no rational justification or empirical verification.  The uncritical adoption of 
dualism weakens their position and opens their perspective to criticism by the opponents 
of growth.  Thus, the pro-growth perspective also cannot resolve the controversy over 
growth.  Just like its antipode, it only deepens the controversy and makes it more acute.   
  
The confining of mental operations into a special category and their dissociation from the 
physical realm makes understanding of the creation of new knowledge and ideas 
impossible.  There is no way to establish control and manage this process without 
understanding it; and there is no way achieve infinite knowledge creation without 
conscious control and management. 
 
In conclusion, the above analysis shows that the two dominant perspectives on infinite 
growth are limited, subjective, and ultimately arbitrary.  They have different foundations 
and, for this reason, largely talk past each other.  The anti-growth perspective uses 
entropy as its organizing principle, while the production of knowledge and new ideas is 
central for the pro-growth perspective.  Neither one, nor the other subjects its organizing 
principles to a critical analysis.  Neither proponents nor opponents of infinite growth 
offer rational justification or empirical evidence in support of their respective 
perspectives.  There is simply no way that these two perspectives can resolve the 
controversy over infinite growth.    
 
 
Rendering Growth Intelligible    
 
A solution of the problem of growth is impossible without an understanding of the 
process of economic growth.  Rendering the process of growth intelligible requires the 
creation of a frame of vision that is broad enough to include all these points and insights 
as its particular cases, i.e., cases that are true under specific conditions or assumptions.  
This article will undertake this task in the pages that follow. 
 
 
Economic Activity, Value Creation, and Growth:  Problems of Definition 
 
The problem of growth is multi-faceted.  Its solution requires a clear understanding of the 
most important aspects of economic growth; and that is where confusion often starts.  
Some of the aspects of growth may appear to be fairly straightforward and 


--- Page 12 ---
 
12
unproblematic.  Yet on close examination they prove to be challenging.  Without 
clarifying these aspects, a solid understanding of economic growth, its source, and its 
importance for economic systems will be difficult, if not impossible. 
 
 As is not uncommon, problems begin with definitions--not lack of definitions (on the 
contrary, definitions are plentiful) but their quality.  This fact is true for economics as it is 
true in many other disciplines.  What often passes for a definition of vital aspects of 
economic growth, and even a good definition, may be clear but trivial and uninteresting, 
opening few possibilities for exploring the subject.  Reading such definition one gets the 
impression that everyone understands what it is all about, that no further explanations are 
needed, and that one should, in fact, feel embarrassed to ask for explanations. 
 
Economic activity is a good starting point in examining the current definitions.  Most 
definitions of economic activity are largely descriptive than explanatory.  They simply 
describe the range of actions relevant to economy.  Here is a popular one supplied d by 
Google: 
 
Economic activity is the activity of making, providing, purchasing, or 
selling goods or services. Any action that involves producing, distributing, 
or consuming products or services is an economic activity. Economic 
activities exist at all levels within a society.41 
 
The problem with this definition is that it does not really explain what is most 
essential about economic activity.  It says little, for example, about what 
motivates economic activities.  Other definitions include such explanations that 
are confusing and contradictory.  For example, one definition states that economic 
activity “is spurred by production which uses natural resources, labor and 
capital,”42 while another explains that “the central purpose of economic activity is 
the production of goods and services to satisfy needs and wants.”43  These 
definitions certainly leave one to wonder whether economic activities create needs 
or needs motivate economic activities.    
 
Lengthier, and fancier, definitions do not necessarily offer more explanatory power.  The 
following definition certainly overloads one’s mental circuits but hardly says more than 
much simpler ones. 
 
Economic activity is the process by which the stock of resources or stock 
of capital produces a flow of output of goods and services that people 
utilize in partial satisfaction of their unlimited wants.44 
 
There are, however, some definitions that are clearer than others.  Here is one that every 
businessperson will understand: 
 
Business begins with value creation. It is the purpose of the institution: to 
create and deliver value in an efficient enough way that it will generate 


--- Page 13 ---
 
13
profit after cost.  Because value creation is the starting point for all 
businesses, successful or not, it’s a fundamental concept to understand.45 
 
The definition clearly states that  economic activities are about value creation.  However, 
its reference to value creation raises questions in the reader’s mind as to what constitutes 
value and how it is created.  The definition offers no clue as to the meaning of this 
important concept.46 
 
If one wants to get confused, looking for a good definition of value and value creation 
offers one of the best chances.   Definitions of value are numerous, often verbose, 
diverse, and very different.  The more definitions one reads, the more one falls into a 
state of confusion, not clarity. 
 
One definition states that economic value is the measurement of the benefit derived from 
a good or service,” but it can also be a “maximum price or amount of money that 
someone is willing to pay for a good or service.”47  So, is value same as price?  Market 
Business News explains:  “Economic value therefore refers to the highest amount a 
consumer is willing to pay for a product or service.”48 In his learned and entertaining 
volume The Origin of Wealth:  The Radical Remaking of Economics and What It Means 
for Business and Society, Eric Beinhocker tries to provide a very rigorous explanation of 
value creation.  In his rendition, value creation involves three conditions:  irreversibility 
(economic transformations should be thermodynamically irreversible); value creation 
should reduce entropy locally but increase it globally; and fitness (value should fit human 
purposes).49  This definition may be in many ways informative but it still leaves one 
wondering about the source of value creation. 
 
The number of various theories of value and value creation is staggering.  There is the 
theory of intrinsic value, the labor theory of value, the monetary theory of value, the 
power theory of value, the subjective theory of value and marginalism.  There are 
theorists who explain value creation by social processes such as the division of labor.50  
These are just a few handy attempts to explain value and value creation; there are many 
others.   Each offers its own version of how value is created.  Some argue that land plays 
an important role in the creation of value; others maintain that labor creates value, still 
others assert that value is a result of valuation by a consumer, or that value is produced by 
social processes, such as the division of labor.  This diversity of definitions and 
explanations leaves one in confusion as to what or who creates value and how.  The only 
certainty one gets from this variety is that value is created and that value creation 
involves new properties.51  Therefore, one can conclude that there must be a process that 
creates new properties, but none of the theorist discusses what such process may look 
like. 
 
Nitpicking about definitions is not gratuitous.  Knowing what economic activities and 
value creation are about is essential for understanding economic growth and its source.  
Most of the above definitions are not particularly helpful.  There are only two 
constructive points that emerge from them.  One is that economic activities are about 
value and that value is created.  Even the theory that claims that value is intrinsic—that 


--- Page 14 ---
 
14
is, inherent in the object—still argues that value is a result of the process of valuation.  
These two points are a good start for discussing growth. 
 
Most current theories of growth are remarkably vague on what constitutes the source of 
growth.  The most popular and widespread view is that growth has its roots in the 
irrational desire to have more of everything.   Elias Canetti, one of the early contributors 
on the subject, saw the source of growth in a transhistorical “will to grow,” which 
reminds one of the Nietzschean “will to power.”  In a similar vein, Gareth Dale sees the 
“desire to accumulate goods, the drive for economic growth, the wish for prosperity” as 
“innate to human social being.”52  According to Dale, this almost religions desire for 
growth is instilled in every crevice of our society:  
 
If there is now one faith, it is faith in production, the modern frenzy of 
increase; and all the peoples of the world are succumbing to it one after 
the other . . . Every factory is a unit serving the same cult.  What is new is 
the acceleration of the process. What in former days was generation and 
increase of expectancy, directed towards rain or corn, . . . has today 
become production itself.  A straight line runs from the rain dance to the 
Nasdaq.53 
 
The French economist Daniel Cohen agrees: 
 
Economic growth is the religion of the modern world, the elixir that eases 
the pain of social conflicts, the promise of indefinite progress.  It offers a 
solution to the everyday drama of human life, to wanting what we don’t 
have.54 
 
In his well-received volume characteristically entitled The Infinite Desire for Growth, 
Cohen writes in response to his own rhetorical question: 
 
Why do human beings constantly want to escape their condition? It is an 
impenetrable question, with which psychoanalysts, anthropologists, and 
economists have sought to come to terms, each in their own words.  But 
the essential can be summed up in a formula:  human desire is profoundly 
malleable, influenced by the social circumstances in which it finds 
expression. That makes it insatiable, infinite.55 
 
The analysis of the dominant theories, definitions, and explanations related to economic 
growth shows that they make important points.  While these points provide valuable 
insights, these insights do not amount to an understanding of growth that would be 
inclusive and yet concise.  They ultimately do not render this process intelligible.   
This task requires bringing the valuable points they make together in a common frame of 
vision that would be broad enough to include all these points as particular cases, that is, 
cases that are true under specific conditions or assumptions.   
 


--- Page 15 ---
 
15
Before constructing such frame, a brief summary of the results of the preceding analysis 
of current theories, definitions, and explanations is in order.  Here are the main points that 
emerge: 
 
1. Although many researchers state as a fact that knowledge and ideas advance 
economic growth, they see the ultimate source of economic growth in the 
irrational sphere.  As many theorists maintain, an irrational desire to have more of 
everything ultimately fuels economic growth.  Knowledge and ideas appear to be 
complementary factors. 
 
2. This irrational desire has no limits.  Consequently, it is capable of generating 
growth indefinitely.  Therefore, an infinite growth is possible. 
 
3. Growth results from economic activities.  Economic activities are about value, 
and value is created. 
 
4. The fact that value is created indicates that value does not exist prior to its 
creation.  In other words, value represents a radical novelty, that is, the emergence 
of new properties that have not existed prior to their emergence. 
 
5. Economic production depletes resources (both human and material).  In other 
words, it produces entropy. 
 
6. The rate of depletion is exponential.  As the study by Nicholas Bloom and his 
collaborators shows, maintaining a linear rate of economic growth requires an 
exponential increase in the number of researchers, which means that their 
productivity per person declines exponentially.  The human capacity to produce is 
a resource and this resource declines exponentially.  This increase indicates an 
exponential decline in productivity—another indication of depletion.56  The 
conclusion then follows that if productivity increases exponentially, the increase 
in researchers would not be necessary.  One can apply the same logic to 
population growth that also follows the exponential power law.  Obviously, an 
exponential decline in productivity per individual requires an exponential increase 
in producers.  
 
 
Economic Growth and the Process of Creation 
 
As has been repeatedly stressed, all economic theories agree that economic growth is 
about value.  They also agree that value is about radically new properties, i.e., properties 
that have had no existence prior to their emergence.  In other words, these properties have 
been created and, therefore, there must be a process that creates these new properties.  
Yet none of the current economic theories discusses the process that creates radical 
novelties. 
 


--- Page 16 ---
 
16
This omission becomes even more curious once one realizes the full importance 
of this process.  It transcends the boundaries of economics and extends to many 
other parts of reality.  We can see its workings at all levels of organization in our 
universe:  from particle, atoms, and molecules, to stars, planets, and galaxies, to 
life, humans, and civilization.  The ubiquity of the process of creation suggests 
that it is fundamental to the very nature of our universe.57 
 
Our universe is unique:  it is all there is. There is nothing outside the universe; in 
fact, the universe has no outside. As there is nothing outside our universe, nothing 
can come into it and nothing can disappear from it because there is nowhere to 
disappear.  Consequently, everything must be conserved.  Conservation originates 
in the uniqueness of our universe and is essential to its existence. 
 
Conservation requires resources; and resources are always limited. Therefore, 
access to new resources is the only path to conservation.  Since resources are 
limited, access to new resources can only come with new possibilities and degrees 
of freedom that can only be a result of new and increasingly more powerful levels 
of organization. When particles combine into atoms or when atoms form 
molecules, they acquire a broader range of possibilities, or degrees of freedom, 
and give rise to new properties.  When hydrogen and oxygen combine they create 
a new molecule—water.  The properties of water are different from those of 
oxygen and hydrogen.  The temperature of the liquid state of water, for example, 
is much higher than temperature of the liquid states of hydrogen or oxygen. 
 
New possibilities offer access to new resources that are essential for conservation. 
Simple molecules can combine into complex molecules (for example, organic 
molecules), which expands their possibilities. Organic molecules allow even more 
diverse combinations that create new and even more powerful levels of 
organization that are capable of sustaining life.  The emergence of new and 
increasingly more powerful levels of organization is the very essence of the 
evolution.  For what is the evolution if not a succession of cascading increasingly 
more powerful levels of organization nested in each other matryoshka style?58 
 
Yet despite this singular importance of the process of creation, we know very little about 
it and study it even less.59  Moreover, we generally do not regard this process as 
intelligible and accessible to human understanding.  Margaret Boden, one of the pre-
eminent researchers in the field of creativity, draws the following conclusion in her 
influential book on creativity:  
 
Our ignorance of our own creativity is very great. We are not aware of all 
the structural constraints involved in particular domains, still less of the 
ways in which they can be creatively transformed. We use creative 
heuristics, but know very little about what they are or how they work.  If 
we do have any sense of these matters, it is very likely tacit rather than 
explicit:  many people can be surprised by a novel harmony, but relatively 
few can explicitly predict even a plagal cadence.60 


--- Page 17 ---
 
17
 
All current economic theories agree that new knowledge and ideas generated by the 
human mind are the primary source of economic growth.61  The human mind has 
emerged in the course of the evolution that is driven by the process of creation.  As a 
result, the human mind has inherited the properties of the process that led to its 
emergence.  Therefore, the way that the human mind operates has the same pattern as the 
universal process of creation.  One sees in its operation the same sequence of 
conservation, creation of new combinations, and the emergence of new and increasingly 
more powerful levels of organization that give rise to new properties (new knowledge 
and ideas).  It obeys the same pattern of exponential growth due to the same operational 
combinatorics that characterizes the universal process of creation.   
 
Indeed, mental constructs are our subjective creations.  However, the process that we use 
to create them is not.  Humans have not created this process but rather inherited it in the 
course of the evolution that preceded the rise of humanity.  This process transcends 
human existence.  It is objective and does not depend on mental constructs created by 
humans.  Humans merely use this process.    
 
As has been pointed out earlier, there is the fundamental connection between the process 
of creation and conservation.  Therefore, economic growth is also primarily and 
objectively about conservation of the existing levels of organization.  Certainly, 
economic growth has ancillary effects:  expanding availability of goods and services, 
increased consumption, improved quality of life, and others.  Indeed, these effects may 
serve as motivations in pursuing economic growth.  However, what ultimately drives 
economic growth is conservation of the existing levels of organization and, first and 
foremost, our current levels of mental organization—the source of our knowledge and 
ideas.   
 
New and more powerful levels of organization give rise to new knowledge and ideas.  
How does the process of creation generate new levels of organization?  Each level of 
organization sustains a number of operations.  Operations are a form of action; and 
conservation of action requires its enactment.  Conservation of functional operations 
requires their activation:  the more they are activated, the more stable they are and the 
better they are conserved.  Activation is a resource for functional operations.  New and 
stable connections with each other activate operations more often and thus conserve them 
better. 
 
Just like the production of new properties in equilibration of physical entities, the 
equilibration of mental operations gives rise to new levels of organization that 
offer new possibilities, new degrees of freedom, and new properties.  The level of 
organization that sustains mental operations and consciousness originates in 
physical activities.  As Jean Piaget has shown, combinations of sensory-motor 
functions (visual, audio, tactile, olfactory, and gustatory) generate mental images 
that open the path to mental operations.62  Sensory-motor functions are operations 
that connect organisms with external reality.  These functions make possible using 
external reality and its resources to sustain the organism.  The operation of 


--- Page 18 ---
 
18
sensory-motor functions is in this respect essentially a form of economic 
production that also derives resources from the environment to sustain human life. 
 
Conservation of human systems, just like conservation of other systems, requires 
integration of all levels of organization.  Mental operations represent the global level of 
organization that regulates physical functions from which this level has emerged.  The 
conservation of this level of organization requires its equilibration with the level of 
physical operations, which means that novelties created at the level of mental operations 
must be translated and assimilated at the level that sustains physical functions.  The 
connection between mental operations and physical operations goes both ways.  Both are 
part of human systems where they represent different levels of organization.  The 
translation of radically new knowledge and ideas into economic production conserves the 
entire system.  Indeed, specific benefits that improve human life will also accrue from 
such integration.  But they are not the only or even the most important result of such 
integration;  the most important result is the conservation of the entire human system.  
 
 
Economic Growth and Its Correlatives 
 
The opponents of economic growth insist that the survival of our civilization vitally 
depends on limiting production, constraining consumption, and reducing population.  The 
correlations between growth, production, consumption, and population are central to this 
argument.  Anti-growth theorists are not the first to establish these correlations.  Back in 
the 18th century the famous British economist Thomas Robert Malthus formulated these 
correlations in a book entitled An Essay on the Principle of Population.63 
 
Malthus argues that linear production growth causes an exponential increase in 
population.  The discrepancy between the two rates of growth leads to overpopulation.  
When resources necessary to support the growing number of people exceed economic 
production capacity, a reduction of the population becomes inescapable.  In Malthus’s 
view, wars and pestilence are inevitable results of overpopulation.  They reduce the 
number of people and restore the balance between the existing level of production and the 
number of people this production supports.  Malthus’s formulation has become known as 
the “Malthusian Loop” or the “Malthusian Trap.” 
 
There has been much criticism of Malthus and his theory and there is no need to rehearse 
this criticism here again.64  Two points, however, are in order for the purposes of this 
article.  Malthus has never adequately explained why an exponential population growth is 
an inevitable response to production increase.  After all, instead of increasing birth rate, 
people can very well decide to concentrate on benefiting from growth and improving 
their conditions.  There is nothing inevitable about this response from the population.  
Also, Malthus has never adequately explained what causes population to grow 
exponentially when the means of sustaining the growing population does not increase at 
the same rate.  Wouldn’t it be wise for people to adjust the two rates and avoid future 
calamities? 
 


--- Page 19 ---
 
19
The correlations between production, consumption and population are also central for the 
contemporary anti-growth theorists.  They have largely adopted it, albeit with significant 
modifications.  They see growth of production and consumption as the ultimate threat to 
the terrestrial environment and resources.  Population growth also remains part of the 
overall equation as a compounding factor.  Although, unlike Malthus, the modern anti-
growth theorists view population growth as an independent variable,65 rather than a 
product of economic advances, they still see the need to reduce population since excess 
of people, in their view, contributes to depletion of resources and degradation of the 
environment.66   
 
The arguments of the opponents of growth raise objections.  For example, as has been 
shown earlier, economic growth does not necessarily has to deplete resources; on the 
contrary, it can reduce consumption of resources per individual.67  Also, critics of growth 
also do not explain the presence of the exponential index in their calculations of the 
depletion of resources.   Likewise, they offer no explanation why population grows 
inexorably and why this growth is also exponential. 
 
The proponents of growth also recognize the correlations between production, 
consumption, depletion of resources, and population growth.  However, they believe that 
production can be effectively divorced “as much as the laws of nature allow” from inputs 
of natural resources, thus permitting growth without depletion.  They emphasize that 
technological change--not just its rate but also the type—can make this de-coupling 
possible, thus ensuring growth without environmental degradation.68  One should also 
add that that, like anti-growth theorists, they also do not explain the presence of the 
exponential index in their calculations.  
 
Correlations of production, consumption, depletion of resources, and overpopulation are 
indicative.  They are too consistent to be dismissed as mere coincidences.  They indicate 
a persistent dependency that requires an explanation.  The fact that these correlations 
follow the exponential power law suggests that an exponential increase in economic 
growth will compensate for the depletion of resources and will offset the need for 
population increases. 
 
The perspective that centers on the process of creation answers the questions that 
dominant theories do not answer.  It agrees with the dominant economic perspectives in 
recognizing that new knowledge and ideas are the most important factors affecting 
economic growth.  According to this perspective, new knowledge and ideas arise from 
new and more powerful levels of organization generated by our mind.   
 
This article emphasizes the role of conservation in the process of creating new levels of 
organization.  Conservation of the operations sustained by a particular level of 
organization results from their combinations with each other.  The equilibration of an n-
number of operations sustained by this level will generate a new and more powerful level 
of organization that will sustain the n2-number of operations, thus displaying an 
exponential growth. 
 


--- Page 20 ---
 
20
The human mind and consciousness can generate an infinite number of new and 
increasingly more powerful levels of mental organization; and the increase in power for 
each level will be exponential; it will follow the power law of n2.  There is an obvious 
connection between the two levels of organization and this relationship goes both ways.  
Exponential increases in power at the level that sustains mental operations will translate 
into increases in power at the level of physical operations, or material production, that it 
regulates.69  A failure to translate exponential increases at the level of mental 
organization into economic growth threatens the conservation of mental operations and 
may lead to the disintegration of the economy and the entire human system. 
 
If we fail to maintain exponential growth, we will not be able to gain access to new 
resources.  Consequently, in order to sustain the linear rate of economic production, we 
have to increase exponentially our use of available resources—both material and human.  
The exponential increase in the use of resources will result in resource depreciation and 
environmental degradation. 
 
Contrary to what the opponents of growth argue, cutting production to save resources will 
offer no relief.  The source of the problem is in lack of growth and consequently 
underutilization of available resources, particularly human resources.  The overuse of 
natural resources comes as a consequence of underutilizing human resources, specifically 
human capacity to create new and increasingly more powerful level of organization.  Real 
growth is in creating new levels of organization, not simply increasing outputs at a given 
level of organization.  Reducing production at the current level does not provide access to 
new resources.  It merely leads to the non-conservation of the current global level of 
organization in the human system, which will make the use of resources even more 
inefficient.  The result will be a progressive and exponential depletion of resource and 
environmental degradation.  Only an exponential economic growth offers the solution.   
 
The same pattern is present in the relationship between economic growth and population. 
People are “the ultimate resource” that we have.70  A failure to achieve an exponential 
growth will result in an exponential decline in productivity, or inefficiency in using the 
human resource.  Studies cited earlier show that if we fail to achieve an exponential 
growth in productivity, we will need to use more people.71  That is what creates the 
momentum for population growth; and this growth follows the exponential power law, as 
Malthus has shown. Considering Julian Simon’s point that humanity itself is “the 
ultimate resource,” the conclusion that a stagnant population is the ultimate resource 
crisis is quite appropriate.72 
 
This is to argue that the cause of population growth is inefficient production.  Attempts to 
limit this growth will never succeed because they do not address the main cause that 
generates exponential population growth—exponential increase in production 
inefficiency.  All efforts to limit the global level of population have failed.  There have 
been numerous summits and conferences over the last several decades that have provided 
platforms for discussions of population problems.73  The only result that they produced, 
as critics charge, were numerous statements to the effect that “reducing population 


--- Page 21 ---
 
21
growth was a necessary part of ecologically sustainable development.”74  This singular 
lack of success has caused much criticism of the entire population science. George 
Weigel, president of the Ethics and Public Policy Center in Washington, 
D.C.—one of the harshest critics—has charged that population science has little merit 
and only produces myths, miscalculations, and bogus predictions.75 
 
Population growth is not an independent variable.76  Its source is production inefficiency 
that grows exponentially and requires exponential compensations. The continued 
acceptance of child labor in the developing world as a partial solution to poverty speaks 
to the shortage of labor due to low productivity.77  Efforts to use compulsion to reduce 
population will be extremely unpopular and utterly ineffective. They will simply put 
more pressure on the economy that will be unable to maintain its current level of 
economic production.  The conclusion is certainly counterintuitive, but the logic of 
population growth suggests that an efficient use of human resources requires exponential 
growth in productivity.  Such growth is the only way to avoid overpopulation.   
 
Finally, there is one more correlative to economic growth that is high on the anti-growth 
agenda.  It is consumption.  The opponents of growth claim that out-of-control 
consumption drives production to unsustainable levels.  Therefore, they advocate 
reducing consumption as a way to constrain production.  Their position is not devoid of 
ambiguities.  They recognize, for example, that there is an urgent need to improve life 
conditions for underprivileged groups and populations in poor countries.  As a way of 
addressing this problem of the growing economic disparity, they propose a more 
equitable wealth distribution.  In other words, they want to use redistribution of wealth to 
increase consumption among the underprivileged.  Consequently  
 
A close analysis of the position of the opponents of growth reveals ambiguity in their 
understanding of the relationship between production and consumption.  They propose 
policies designed to reduce consumption as a way of constraining growth.  However, they 
also believe that they can increase consumption among underprivileged groups and at the 
same time reduce production.  In other words, their proposed policies reveal that they 
hold two different views of the relationship between production and consumption.  On 
one hand, they see them as deeply interrelated:  an increase of consumption leads to an 
increase in production and vice versa.  On the other hand, they also believe that they can 
increase consumption without increasing production.  They do not explain why they hold 
such diametrically opposed views.  They apparently do not even see any paradox in the 
way they view the relationship production from consumption.  
 
Consumption is a form of assimilation, i.e., the inclusion of one entity into functional 
operations of another.  When operations combine, they assimilate each other, or include 
each other into their functional activities.  In a way, they consume each other, or use each 
other to conserve and sustain their own functions.  But, at the same time, this 
consumption produces new combinations--new entities. 
 
Thus, production and consumption are intimately interrelated.  They are both aspects of 
the process that creates new properties, or what economists call value creation. They are 


--- Page 22 ---
 
22
analytical, rather than ontological categories.  As the analysis of the process of creation 
shows, the conservation of a given level of organization creates a new and more powerful 
level of organization.  The emerging level of organization supervenes on the level from 
which it emerges; in other words, the level of organization that gives rise the new level of 
organization is a resource that is consumed in the process of creation.  One can also 
represent this relationship between consumption and production as a balance between 
equilibration and the production of disequilibrium.  In this conception, disequilibrium is a 
resource for equilibration that produces new disequilibrium. 
 
There is another example to illustrate the close relationship between production and 
consumption.  Our sensory-motor functions produce and consume reality at the same 
time.  Our relationship with reality sustained by sensory-motor functions involves both 
consumption and production.  When we observe reality, we organize/produce it 
according to the structure of our sensory-motor functions; at the same time, when our 
sensory-motor functions include this organized reality into their operations they consume 
this organized reality, which conserves sensory-motor functions and ensures their 
continued operations.  Viewing production and consumption through the prism of the 
process of creation shows their fundamental complementarity.  Only when the process of 
creation is not central to one’s frame of vision, production and consumption appear as 
ontologically separate and independent from each other.   
 
The ambiguity in the approach by the opponents of growth toward the problem of 
consumption shows that the process of creation is not central to their frame of vision.  
This fact reflects a more general condition in our economic production that is not 
organized around the process of creation.  A dissociation of consumption and production 
is not uncommon in our economy that has a strong tendency to underutilize and waste our 
most important resource—human capacity to create.  There are also numerous examples 
when consumption is wasteful and does not contribute to growth in productivity. 
 
By producing new and increasingly more powerful levels of organization we generate 
new knowledge and ideas that lead to economic growth.  Knowledge, for example, is one 
important product that does not depreciate.  It only appreciates when consumed, as its 
consumption leads to new and increasingly more powerful levels of organization that 
give rise to new knowledge and ideas.  As Thomas Davenport and Lawrence Prusak have 
noted, “ideas breed new ideas, and shared knowledge stays with the giver while it 
enriches the receiver.”78   
 
Organizing our economic activities around the process of creation will end this tendency 
to dissociate production from consumption; it will make will make the interrelationship 
between production and consumption effective and efficient.  By complementing each 
other, they both will be able to grow exponentially and will make possible an exponential 
growth of our entire economy.  One can see the contours of this new economic 
organization in the comment of Alan Webber who concludes:  “In the end, the location of 
the new economy is not in the technology, be it the microchip or the global 
telecommunications network. It is in the human mind.”79 
 


--- Page 23 ---
 
23
 
The New Economy of Exponential Growth 
 
If economic growth is so important, if the process of creation that fuels economic 
growth is so powerful as to sustain our entire universe, why do we fail to use it 
and achieve an infinite exponential economic growth?  The reason is due 
primarily to the fact that we have not embraced the process of creation.  We do 
not understand how it functions and, consequently, cannot control and use it fully 
to our advantage. 
 
Consciousness is the most distinct feature of human nature.  It represents the most 
powerful level of mental organization.  Therefore, if we fail to achieve 
exponential growth, the reason for this failure can only reside in consciousness. 
 
Just like any other level of organization, the level of organization that sustains 
consciousness and its operations must be conserved; therefore, consciousness 
must engage in creating new and increasingly more powerful levels of its 
organization.  Since consciousness is involved, engaging the process of creation 
cannot be a spontaneous development.  It must be a result of conscious efforts 
and, therefore, it must be intentional.  Our consciousness should embrace the 
process of creation.  We should understand how the process of creation operates 
and we should consciously and intentionally use this process as the main 
organizing principles of our economic practice. 
 
Many researchers indicate the need to change our economic practice.  Maria 
Sandberg and her co-authors express the conviction of many scientists that 
“changes in the organization of human society and economy are needed to stop 
the degradation of the natural environment.” 80  One can also see this expressed 
need in the call for changing managerial and business practices.81 
 
The fact that we still fail to embrace and understand the process of creation is no 
accident.  The source of this failure has deep evolutionary roots that I have 
explained elsewhere.82  Although this failure has evolutionary roots, it is not 
irremediable.  Our consciousness represents the most powerful level of 
organization of reality.  It is capable of solving any problem even if such problem 
is due to its own failing. 
 
Contrary to what the opponents of growth maintain, there are no inherent physical 
obstacles, such as entropy production, to achieving infinite and exponential 
economic growth.  Indeed, according to the Second Law of Thermodynamics, the 
level of entropy production cannot be less than zero.  However, there is nothing in 
this law that prohibits entropy production to stay at a zero level. 
 
There are some specific reasons why we have so far failed to embrace fully the 
process of creation.  For one thing, we still do not believe that this process is 
accessible to human understanding.  The process of creation operates on 


--- Page 24 ---
 
24
inclusion.  Yet the social practice that dominates our civilization has been and 
remains exclusionary.  We fear differences and seek to shun and suppress them, 
which smothers the process of creation.  Finally, there is a great deal of 
institutional inertia and reliance on old and tired dogmas.  All these obstacles 
should be removed.  By embracing the process of creation and using it as the main 
organizing principle of our practice, we can achieve exponential growth.   
 
The consequences of not achieving exponential growth are with us.  We live with 
them.   We deplete our resources, including human resources.  The decline of 
productivity is exponential and so is the depletion.  The exponential decline in 
productivity also makes necessary the exponential increase in population.  
Reducing population is not a substitute for an exponential growth of productivity 
and neither does the redistribution of wealth.  Both are irrelevant to economic 
growth.  They can only make the effects of a lack of growth more serious.83 
 
Without infinite exponential economic growth we cannot sustain our civilization.  
Due to lack of exponential growth, we cannot maintain the production of entropy 
at a zero-level.  The inevitable result is a progressive degradation of our 
environment and an unsustainable growth of the population. As many have 
already recognized, the continuation of these trends will lead to the destruction of 
our civilization and our planet. 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
The importance of the problem of growth is hard to overestimate.  The health of our 
economy and society and the sustainability of our civilization vitally depend on the 
solution of this problem.  The fact that this problem still remains unsolved is arguably the 
biggest threat to the survival of humanity.   
 
This article has shown that the survival of our civilization requires the constant creation 
of new and increasingly more powerful levels of organization.  Each new level of 
organization new level of organization represents an exponential increase in power.  The 
article has also explained the reason why this growth should be infinite and exponential.  
Here is a recapitulation of the main points: 
 
1. The conservation of a system, including human systems (such as, for example, 
civilization), requires regulation.   
 
2. The level of organization that regulates a particular system is always the most 
powerful level of organization in this system.  It emerges as a result of the 
equilibration of all functional operations of this system.  Since the emergence of a 
new level involves the creation of combinations of operations, power of this level 
of organization is always exponentially greater than the power of the sum total of 
all operations in regulates. 
 


--- Page 25 ---
 
25
3. The regulatory level of organization also requires conservation that can only be 
provided through the creation of a new level of organization that will also 
represent an exponential increase in power in comparison to the level it conserves. 
 
4. Thus, the sustaining of our civilization, including its economic system, requires a 
constant exponential increase in power, or exponential growth. 
 
5. Moreover, since we can and, indeed, must always create a new level of 
organization that would regulate and conserve our current level, this growth is 
infinite. 
 
6. A failure to achieve an exponential growth inevitably leads to an exponential 
decline in productivity, an exponential rate in the depletion of resources, and an 
exponential population growth. 
 
As this article has shown, the two dominant perspectives on growth do not provide a 
definitive solution to the problem of growth.  On the contrary, they have only deepened 
the controversy, added to confusion, and made the resolution less likely, if not indeed 
impossible.  They have become part of the problem, rather than part of its solution.  Tony 
Lawson has thus characterized the current state of economics as a discipline: 
 
I want to argue, however, that the remedies suggested, if in the context 
sometimes remarkable, are not going to make things sufficiently better. 
And the reason for this is simply that the problems identified do not 
represent the real nature of the relevant disorder.  Economics is a 
discipline in some disarray. Most notably its most prestigious branch, 
"economic theory," appears quite unequal to the tasks of explaining real-
world events or informing policy analysis.84 
 
There is no need to accept this sad state as inevitable.  We need a new perspective on the 
familiar and broadly discussed economic issue.  Economics does not have to be a 
guessing game.  One can agree with Tony Lawson that it “can easily be transformed into 
a subject that is potentially illuminating, consequential for policy design, and even 
emancipatory.”85 
 
This article recognizes that both current perspectives on growth make valid points.  One 
can certainly agree with the recognition of the importance of entropy production 
emphasized by the opponents of infinite growth.  However, one should also 
acknowledge, as this article does, that their understanding of the role of entropy 
production is very limited.  In their view, entropy production only depletes resources and 
creates disorder.  They do not see that entropy production also produces order.  
Equilibration that is central to entropy production also generates new and increasingly 
more powerful levels of organization and, thus, disequilibrium, or the foundation of a 
new order. 
 


--- Page 26 ---
 
26
The limited understanding of the role of entropy leads to conclusions and policy 
recommendations that are wrong-headed and even harmful.  They cannot solve the 
problems we face; they can only lead to a disintegration of our production system and, 
ultimately, the civilization.  The course that the opponents of growth chart will work 
against the creation of new and increasingly more powerful levels of organization that is 
essential for sustaining our economy and civilization.   This course can only lead to a 
progressive dismantling of the levels of organization that we have already created.  It 
leads into a dead end.   
 
One can also appreciate the emphasis on human creative capacity made by the 
proponents of infinite growth.  This capacity has certainly served humanity well in the 
course of its history.  However, the proponents of growth base their perspective on the 
recognition that mental and physical operations are fundamentally different.  They do not 
provide a rational justification or empirical verification for this assertion that ultimately is 
a reflection of the traditional mind-matter dualism.  This emphasis puts the creation of 
knowledge and ideas into a separate category that, unlike physical activities, is 
inaccessible to human reason.  As a result, the perspective formulated by the pro-growth 
theorists is not conducive to understanding the process that generates knowledge and 
ideas—an understanding that is essential for controlling and managing the process of 
creation and thus enhancing economic growth. 
 
There are also other problems with the current pro-growth perspective.  It tends to 
overemphasize the importance of technological innovation and underestimate the need 
for a more comprehensive approach that would involve all levels of the human system.  
The proponents of growth are overly enthusiastic about quick fixes.  As the ultimate 
solution of the current economic problems, digital and communication technology, for 
example, generates a great deal of unjustified optimism.86 
 
Technocratic quick fixes may catch headlines, but, as many researchers recognize, they 
will not solve the problem of growth.  While technological innovations are important, 
they are not sufficient.  Summarizing the current tendency to lionize technocratic utopian 
solutions, Christian Cancino and his co-authors emphasize a broader intellectual context 
that new solutions require.  They write: 
 
There is an excessive reliance on technological innovation.  They do not 
understand that technological innovation does not occur in a vacuum.  Just 
as other spheres of intellectual pursuit, it is dependent on the creation of 
new levels of organization.  It is, for example, co-dependent on science . . . 
Their partial perspectives and lenses generate new knowledge in their own 
domains, but they are not necessarily compatible and complementary in a 
more holistic perspective.87 
 
Marinko Skare and Małgorzata Poradarochon also point to the insufficiency of 
technological progress alone.  In their view, technological innovation “is only a necessary 
prerequisite for long-term sustainability but is not sufficient.”88 Mirjam Beltrami, among 
others, stresses the impact of technology on other spheres of economic practice and sees 


--- Page 27 ---
 
27
the need for comprehensive changes.89  These are just a few of many who call for a 
comprehensive approach that will reorganize our economic, and not only economic, 
practices. 
 
While the article accepts the point about the importance of new technological ideas, it 
also contends that human capacity to create knowledge and generate new ideas does not 
stand apart from the natural order but lies fully within it.  By taking this approach, the 
article stresses the need of using the study of the process of creation in nature in a way 
that will complement and enrich all current perspectives on economic growth.  The 
perspective outlined in this article recognizes and accepts the valid points made by both 
the proponents and the opponents of growth.  It incorporates these points into a broader 
frame as its particular cases—that is, cases that rely on special assumptions or conditions.  
The key to such integration is the recognition of the centrality of the process of creation.  
This article sees the failure to understand this process as a serious flaw in both dominant 
perspectives. 
 
The central focus and the organizing principle of the inclusive perspective outlined in this 
article is the process of creation.  The article argues that the failure to grasp the centrality 
of this process leads to fragmentary and contradictory views of reality that characterizes 
both dominant perspectives.  By offering a view that is inclusive and comprehensive, the 
perspective outlined in this article resolves the controversy over infinite growth.  It makes 
clear that exponential growth is essential for sustaining our civilization and this growth 
can and must be infinite.  Only by constantly creating new and increasingly more 
powerful level of organization, we can ensure the survival of human civilization.  This 
perspective also suggests that we will be well advised to use the process of creation as the 
main organizing principle of our social practice, including economic production and 
management. 
 
This article shows that infinite exponential growth will lead to increases in productivity 
and will reduce the depletion of resources.  It will constrain population growth since there 
will be no expressed need to use more people to compensate for the inadequate growth.  
The fact that the exponential index n2 appears in the process of creation, in depletion of 
resources, in the growth of the population and other phenomena correlated with economic 
growth is not accidental.  These correlatives are closely related to the process of creation 
that is fundamental to nature.  Nothing short of an infinite and exponential growth can 
sustain our civilization.  Any proposal that promises to save our civilization by ending or 
constraining growth and by reducing production and consumption has no basis in reality; 
and neither do the proposals that seek to reduce population as a way of saving humanity.  
Such proposals can only lead to the disintegration of human systems, including our 
economy. 
 
Infinite and exponential growth is the only path forward toward sustaining human life 
and civilization.  Such growth is the fulfillment of the destiny bequeathed to the human 
race by the entire evolution of nature:  to continue creating new and increasingly more 
powerful levels organization indefinitely, thus shaping and reshaping the future of our 
civilization and that of the universe. 


--- Page 28 ---
 
28
 
ENDNOTES 
 
                                                
1 N. Georgescu-Roegen, The Entropy Law and the Economic Process (Cambridge, Mass.:  
Harvard University Press, 1971). 
 
2 Vaclav Smil, “Infinite Growth Is a Pipe Dream,” Financial Times, August 8, 2019. 
https://www.ft.com/content/db0a7be2-b2d2-11e9-b2c2-1e116952691a; Vaclav Smil, 
Growth:  From Microorganisms to Megacities (Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT 
Press, 2019); Blair Fix, Rethinking Economic Growth Theory From a Biophysical 
Perspective (New York:  Springer, 2015); Christopher F. Jones, “The Delusion and 
Danger of Infinite Economic Growth.” The New Republic, October 1, 2019. 
https://newrepublic.com/article/155214/delusion-danger-infinite-economic-growth; 
Jonathan Herz, “The Fairy Tale of Eternal Economic Growth | Article | EESI.” October 
11, 2019, https://www.eesi.org/articles/view/the-fairy-tale-of-eternal-economic-growth 
(accessed December 15, 2021); Chirag Singh and Vandana Dhara, “The Delusion of 
Infinite Economic Growth,” Scientific American, June 20, 2021, 
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-delusion-of-infinite-economic-growth/. 
 
3 Jones, “The Delusion and Danger of Infinite Economic Growth.”  
 
4 Jonathan Herz. “The Fairy Tale of Eternal Economic Growth.” 
 
5 Vaclav Smil, “Infinite Growth Is a Pipe Dream.” Financial Times, August 8, 2019, 
https://www.ft.com/content/db0a7be2-b2d2-11e9-b2c2-1e116952691a. 
 
6 Singh and  Dhara, “The Delusion of Infinite Economic Growth.” 
 
7 “The myth of infinite growth on a finite planet,” Global Institute of Sustainability and 
Innovation, Arizona State University, https://sustainability-
innovation.asu.edu/news/archive/the-myth-of-infinite-growth-on-a-finite-planet/. 
 
8 John Cairns, “The Age of Transition to Sustainability: The End of the Exponential 
Growth Period,” Politics and the Life Sciences, vol. 20, no. 2 (2001), pp. 131–38, p. 131. 
 
9 Cairns, “The Age of Transition to Sustainability,” p. 134. 
 
10 Cairns, “The Age of Transition to Sustainability,” p. 131. 
 
11 Cairns, “The Age of Transition to Sustainability,” p. 133. 
 
12 Melissa Mayer, “What Are Environmental Problems Due to Population Growth?” 
Sciencing, 2018. https://sciencing.com/environmental-problems-due-population-growth-
8337820.html. 
 


--- Page 29 ---
 
29
                                                
13 Matthew Johnston, “Is Infinite Economic Growth on a Finite Planet Possible?” 
Investopedia (accessed December 15, 2021), 
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/120515/infinite-economic-growth-finite-
planet-possible.asp. 
 
14 Oliver Waters, “The Strange Necessity of Infinite Economic Growth,” Medium (blog), 
November 14, 2018, https://medium.com/@oliverwaters_76079/the-strange-necessity-of-
infinite-economic-growth-ebc2e505cdf1. 
 
15 Jason Crawford, “Exponential Growth Is the Baseline,” The Roots of Progress, 
February 21, 2021, https://rootsofprogress.org/exponential-growth-is-the-baseline.  Also, 
Jeffrey Dorfman, “Why Growth Matters,” Forbes, December 22, 2017, 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jeffreydorfman/2017/12/22/why-growth-matters/; Tim 
Harford, “Can Economic Growth Continue Forever? Of Course!” Freakonomics (blog), 
January 24, 2014. https://freakonomics.com/2014/01/24/can-economic-growth-continue-
forever-of-course/. 
 
16 Tim Harford, The Undercover Economist Strikes Back: How to Run--or Ruin--an 
Economy (New York:  Riverhead Books, 2015). 
 
17 Max Roser, “What Is Economic Growth? And Why Is It so Important?” Our World in 
Data, May 13, 2021, https://ourworldindata.org/what-is-economic-growth. 
18 Robert Solow. (1957): “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,” 
Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 39 (1957), pp. 312-320. 
 
 
19 Jones, “The Delusion and Danger of Infinite Economic Growth.” 
 
20 See, for example, David Mowery and Nathan Rosenberg, Technology and the Pursuit 
of Economic Growth (Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press, 1989), 
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511664441; Matti Pohjola, ed., Information Technology 
and Economic Growth:  A Cross-Country Analysis. Working Papers WP, 2000. 
https://doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.295500; Andrea Bassanini, Stefano Scarpetta, and 
Ignazio Visco, “Knowledge, Technology and Economic Growth:  Recent Evidence from 
OECD Countries,” SSRN Scholarly Papers (Rochester, NY: S ocial Science Research 
Network, 2000), https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.246375; Elena G. Popkova, Paola De 
Bernardi, Yuliya G. Tyurina, and Bruno S. Sergi, “A Theory of Digital Technology 
Advancement to Address the Grand Challenges of Sustainable Development,” 
Technology in Society, vol. 68 (February 1, 2022): 101831, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2021.101831; Fabien Martinez, Ken Peattie, and Diego 
Vazquez-Brust, “Faith in the Future:  On a Mission to Integrate Sustainability into 
Management Theory and Practice,” Futures, vol. 125 (January 1, 2021): 102654, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2020.102654. 
 


--- Page 30 ---
 
30
                                                
21 Ying Liu, Wan-Ming Chen, Sheng-Yuan Wang, and Xiao-Lan Wu, “Sustainable 
Growth from a Factor Dependence and Technological Progress Perspective:  A Case 
Study of East China,” Discrete Dynamics in Nature & Society, September 2, 2021, 1–12, 
p. 11,  https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/8739442. 
 
22 Philippe Aghion and Peter Howitt, “Some Thoughts on Capital Accumulation, 
Innovation, and Growth,” Annals of Economics and Statistics, no. 125/126 (2017), pp. 
57–78, https://doi.org/10.15609/annaeconstat2009.125-126.0057. 
 
23 Johnston, “Is Infinite Economic Growth on a Finite Planet Possible?” 
 
24 Arnold Neumaier, “Entropy and Knowledge,” 
https://www.mat.univie.ac.at/~neum/physfaq/topics/knowledge.html (accessed December 
31, 2021). 
 
25 J. T. Young, “Entropy and Natural Resource Scarcity: A Reply to the Critics,”  Journal 
of Environmental Economics and Management, vol. 26, no. 2 (March 1994), pp.  210–
213, p. 213. 
 
26 Young, “Entropy and Natural Resource Scarcity:  A Reply to the Critics,” pp. 212-213. 
 
27 This argument reminds one of “Maxwell’s demon”—a hypothetical intelligent being or 
a device that can reverse the entropic tendency in interactions of molecules, thus violating 
the second law of thermodynamics.  James Clerk Maxwell proposed this 
Gedankenexperiment (German for “thought experiment”) in 1871 (Encyclopedia 
Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/science/Maxwells-demon). 
 
28 J. T. Young, “Is the Entropy law relevant to the economics of natural resource 
scarcity?” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, vol. 21, no. 2 
(September 1991), pp. 169-179.  
 
29 Johnston, “Is Infinite Economic Growth on a Finite Planet Possible?”  
 
30 Shkliarevsky, Gennady. “On Order and Randomness: A View from the Edge of 
Chaos,” April 20, 2011, 
http://search.arxiv.org:8081/paper.jsp?r=1104.4133&qid=1372596301818mix_nCnN_-
392512110&qs=Gennady+Shkliarevsky. 
 
31 I. Prigogine and I. Stengers, Order out of Chaos (New York:  Bantam Books, 1984), 
particularly pp. 292-95; Steven Wolfram, A New Kind of Science (Champaign, Il.:  
Wolfram Media, 2002); Paul H. Carr, “Does God Play Dice?  Insights from the Fractal 
Geometry of Nature,” Zygon, vol. 39, no. 4 (December 2003), p. 934; Tamas Vicsek, 
“The Bigger Picture,” Nature, Vol. 418 (11 July 2002), p. 131; Kees Wapenaar and Roel 
Snieder, “Determinism:  Chaos Tamed,” Nature, vol. 447, no. 7145 (June 7, 2007),  p. 
643; Gennady Shkliarevsky, “On Order and Randomness:  A View From the Edge of 


--- Page 31 ---
 
31
                                                
Chaos,” ArXiv (April 20, 2011),  
http://search.arxiv.org:8081/paper.jsp?r=1104.4133&qid=1372596301818mix_nCnN_-
392512110&qs=Gennady+Shkliarevsky. 
 
32 See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edge_of_chaos (accessed on June 28, 2013). 
 
33 Manasse Mbonye, “Constraints on Cosmic Dynamics,” arXiv:gr-qe/0309135v1 30 Sep 
2003, pp. 1-2 (accessed November 21, 2008). 
 
34 Numerous critics of the Big Bang point to the highly speculative nature of this theory 
and argue that since it is an extrapolation from the current conditions into the past, this 
theory is not justified and still lacks unambiguous empirical support.  Sean Carroll, for 
example, observes that “. . . scenarios of this type are extremely speculative and may very 
well be wrong” (Sean Carroll, “Is Our Universe Natural?” arXiv:hep-th0512148v1 13 
Dec 2005, p. 5 (accessed February 21, 2010); Paul Steinhard and Neil Turok—two 
prominent critics of Big Bang—also argue in a similar way and propose their own 
cyclical theory of the universe that is based on reversibility as its organizing principle 
(Paul J. Steinhard and Neil Turok, “A Cyclic Model of the Universe,” Science, vol. 296, 
issue 5572  [May 24, 2002], pp. 1436-40). 
 
35 Jean Piaget, The Origins of Intelligence in Children (Madison, Conn.: International 
Universities Press, Inc., 1998). 
 
 
36 Gennady Shkliarevsky, “Science and Its Discontents:  Is There an End to Knowing?,” 
Systems Research and Behavioral Science, vol. 30, no. 1 (2013), pp. 43–55; The Roots of 
Progress, “Exponential Growth Is the Baseline,” February 21, 2021. 
https://rootsofprogress.org/exponential-growth-is-the-baseline. 
 
37 Nicholas Bloom,  Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb, “Are Ideas 
Getting Harder to Find?” Working Paper. Working Paper Series. National Bureau of 
Economic Research, September 2017, p. 46,  https://doi.org/10.3386/w23782. 
 
38 Moore's law is a term associated with the observation made by Gordon Moore in 1965 
that the number of transistors in a dense integrated circuit (IC) doubles about every two 
years. 
 
39 Bloom, et. al., “Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?” p. 46.  
 
40 The Roots of Progress. “Exponential Growth Is the Baseline,” February 21, 2021. 
https://rootsofprogress.org/exponential-growth-is-the-baseline. 
 
41 Market Business News, https://marketbusinessnews.com/financial-glossary/economic-
activity/ 
 
42 Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economy 


--- Page 32 ---
 
32
                                                
 
43 GCSE, Economics (8136), 
https://filestore.aqa.org.uk/resources/economics/specifications/AQA-8136-SP-2017.PDF 
 
44 This one has been supplied by the University of Toronto 
(https://www.economics.utoronto.ca/jfloyd/modules/neastkf.html). 
 
45 Eric Jorgenson, “Why Value Creation Is the Foundation of Business:  How to Define 
It, Measure It, and Manage It,” Evergreen Business Fortnightly (blog), September 14, 
2015, https://medium.com/evergreen-business-weekly/why-value-creation-is-the-
foundation-of-business-how-to-define-it-measure-it-and-manage-it-147c92b87aca 
 
46 Jorgenson, “Why Value Creation Is the Foundation of Business.” 
 
47 Investopedia, October 28, 2021, 
https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/061615/what-difference-between-economic-
value-and-market-value.asp. 
 
48 https://marketbusinessnews.com/financial-glossary/economic-value/ 
 
49 Eric D. Beinhocker, The Origin of Wealth:  The Radical Remaking of Economics and 
What It Means for Business and Society (Boston, Mass: Harvard Business Review Press, 
2007, p. 303. 
 
50 Robert P. Gilles, “The Principles of Economic Wealth Creation,” Economic Wealth 
Creation and the Social Division of Labour (Cham:  Palgrave Macmillan, 2018).  
 
51 Richard Makadok and Russell Coff, “The Theory of Value and the Value of Theory: 
Breaking New Ground versus Reinventing the Wheel,” The Academy of Management 
Review, vol. 27, no. 1 (2002), pp. 10–13.  
 
52 Gareth Dale, “Economic Growth:  A Short History of a Controversial Idea,” 
openDemocracy, https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/oureconomy/economic-growth-
short-history-controversial-idea/ (accessed December 16, 2021) 
 
53 Dale, Gareth. “Economic Growth: A Short History of a Controversial Idea.” 
 
54 Daniel Cohen, The Infinite Desire for Growth (Princeton:  Princeton University Press, 
2018), p. 1. 
55 Cohen, Daniel. The Infinite Desire for Growth, pp. 151-52. 
 
56 Bloom, et. al., “Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?” p. 46. 
 


--- Page 33 ---
 
33
                                                
57 Gennady Shkliarevsky, “Revising the Cosmic Story,” SSRN Scholarly Paper 
(Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, December 22, 2020),  
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3753651 
 
58 Shkliarevsky, Revising the Darwinian Project. Gennady Shkliarevsky, “Conservation, 
Creation, and Evolution:  Revising the Darwinian Project,” Journal of Evolutionary 
Science, vol. 1, no. 2 (September 25, 2019), pp. 1–30. https://doi.org/10.14302/issn.2689-
4602.jes-19-2990. 
 
59 Gennady Shkliarevsky, “Understanding the Process of Creation:  A New Approach,” 
Management:Journal of Sustainable Business and Management Solutions in Emerging 
Economies, vol. 22, no. 3 (October 31, 2017), pp. 1–13, 
https://doi.org/10.7595/management.fon.2017.0021; Davide Piffer, “Can Creativity Be 
Measured? An Attempt to Clarify the Notion of Creativity and General Directions for 
Future Research,” Thinking Skills and Creativity, vol. 7 (2012), pp. 258–64; K. H. Kim, 
“Can we trust creativity tests?  A review of the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking 
(TTCT),” Creativity Research Journal, vol. 18 (2006), pp. 3–14.  R. E. Mayer, “Fifty 
years of creativity research,” in R. J. Sternberg ed., Handbook of creativity (pp. 449–
460). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999). 
 
60 Margaret Boden, The Creative Mind:  Myths and Mechanisms, 2nd ed. (London, New 
York:  Routledge, 2004), p.  246. 
 
61 Andrea Bassanini, Stefano Scarpetta, and Ignazio Visco, “Knowledge, Technology and 
Economic Growth:  Recent Evidence from OECD Countries,” SSRN Scholarly Paper. 
(Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, October 1, 2000), 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.246375; Matti Pohjola, ed., Information Technology and 
Economic Growth:  A Cross-Country Analysis. Working Papers WP, 2000. 
https://doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.295500; Philoppe Aghion and Peter Howitt, “Some 
Thoughts on Capital Accumulation, Innovation, and Growth,” Annals of Economics and 
Statistics, no. 125/126 (2017), pp. 57–78. https://doi.org/10.15609/annaeconstat2009.125-
126.0057; Jason Crawford, “Exponential Growth Is the Baseline,” The Roots of Progress, 
February 21, 2021, https://rootsofprogress.org/exponential-growth-is-the-baseline. 
 
62 Jean Piaget, The Origins of Intelligence in Children (Madison, Conn.: International 
Universities Press, Inc., 1998). 
 
63 T. R. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population:  Text, Sources and 
Background, Criticism (New York:  Norton, 1976). 
 
64 David N. Weil and Joshua Wilde, “How Relevant Is Malthus for Economic 
Development Today?” The American Economic Review, vol. 100, no. 2 (May 2010), pp. 
378–82. 
 


--- Page 34 ---
 
34
                                                
65 Melissa Mayer, “What Are Environmental Problems Due to Population Growth?” 
Sciencing, 2018, https://sciencing.com/environmental-problems-due-population-growth-
8337820.html. 
 
66 Population Summit (1993 : New Delhi, India), and Francis Graham-Smith. Population, 
the Complex Reality :  A Report of the Population Summit of the World’s Scientific 
Academies (London :  Royal Society ; Golden, Colo. : North American Press, 1994), 
http://archive.org/details/populationcomple00popu; "Science Summit on World 
Population:  A Joint Statement by 58 of the World's Scientific Academies,” Population 
and Development Review, vol. 20, no. 1 (Mar., 1994), pp. 233-38. 
 
67 Johnston, “Is Infinite Economic Growth on a Finite Planet Possible?” 
 
68 Pietro Peretto, “Through Scarcity to Prosperity:  Toward a Theory of Sustainable 
Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 117 (January 2021), pp. 243–57, p. 243. 
 
69 Cf. the description of the process of creation, equilibration, and systems evolution 
Gennady Shkliarevsky, “Conservation, Creation, and Evolution:  Revising the Darwinian 
Project,” Journal of Evolutionary Science, vol. 1, issue 2 (2019), pp. 1-30, 
https://openaccesspub.org/journal/jes/current-issue. 
 
70 The Roots of Progress. “Exponential Growth Is the Baseline,” February 21, 2021. 
https://rootsofprogress.org/exponential-growth-is-the-baseline  
 
71 Bloom, et al.,  “Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?”  
 
72 The Roots of Progress. “Exponential Growth Is the Baseline,” February 21, 2021. 
https://rootsofprogress.org/exponential-growth-is-the-baseline. 
 
73 Population Summit (1993 : New Delhi, India), and Francis Graham-Smith, Population, 
the Complex Reality; "Science Summit on World Population: A Joint Statement.” 
 
74 S. Ryan Johansson, “Complexity, Morality, and Policy at the Population Summit,” 
Population and Development Review, vol. 21, no. 2 (1995), pp. 361–86, p. 361, 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2137499. 
 
75 George Weigle, “False Precision and Population Science.” Baltimore Sun, September 
7, 1994, https://www.baltimoresun.com/news/bs-xpm-1994-09-07-1994250032-
story.html. 
 
76 Mayer, “What Are Environmental Problems Due to Population Growth.” 
 
77 Johansson, “Complexity, Morality, and Policy at the Population Summit,” p. 382.  
 


--- Page 35 ---
 
35
                                                
78 Thomas H. Davenport and Lawrence Prusak, “Working Knowledge:  How 
Organizations Manage What They Know,” Ubiquity: An ACM IT Magazine and Forum 
(August 1-August 31, 2000), p. 13, http://ubiquity.acm.org/article.cfm?id=348775.  
 
79 Alan M. Webber, “What’s So New About the New Economy?” Harvard Business 
Review, January 1, 1993. https://hbr.org/1993/01/whats-so-new-about-the-new-economy. 
 
80 Maria Sandberg, Kristian Klockars, and Kristoffer Wilén, “Green Growth or 
Degrowth? Assessing the Normative Justifications for Environmental Sustainability and 
Economic Growth through Critical Social Theory.” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol 
206 (January 1, 2019), pp. 133–41, p. 133, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.09.175. 
 
81 Fabien Martinez, Ken Peattie, and Diego Vazquez-Brust, “Faith in the Future: On a 
Mission to Integrate Sustainability into Management Theory and Practice,” Futures, vol. 
125 (January 1, 2021): 102654, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2020.102654. 
 
82 Gennady Shkliarevsky, “ Living a Non-Anthropocentric Future” (September 29, 2021), 
SSRN, September 29, 2021, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3933108 or 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3933108; Gennady Shkliarevsky, “In Quest for Justice: 
Solving the Problem of Inclusion and Equality,” SSRN. June 8, 2021, 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3862630 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3862630 . 
 
83 David N. Weil and Joshua Wilde, “How Relevant Is Malthus for Economic 
Development Today?” The American Economic Review, vol. 100, no. 2 (May 2010), pp. 
378–82. 
 
84 Tony Lawson, “A Realist Perspective on Contemporary ‘Economic Theory,’” Journal 
of Economic Issues, vol. 29, no. 1 (1995), pp. 1–32, pp. 1 and 29. 
 
85 Lawson, “A Realist Perspective on Contemporary ‘Economic Theory,’” p. 30. 
 
86 Elena G. Popkova, Paola De Bernardi, Yuliya G. Tyurina, and Bruno S. Sergi, “A 
Theory of Digital Technology Advancement to Address the Grand Challenges of 
Sustainable Development,” Technology in Society, vol. 68 (February 1, 2022): 101831, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2021.101831. 
 
87 Christian A., Cancino, Ariel I. La Paz, Arkalgud Ramaprasad, and Thant Syn. 
“Technological Innovation for Sustainable Growth:  An Ontological Perspective.” 
Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 179 (April 2018), pp. 31–41, p. 31, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.059.  See also J. K. Hall, G. A. Daneke, and M. 
J. Lenox, “Sustainable development and entrepreneurship:  past contributions and future 
directions,” Journal of Business Ventures, vol. 25, no. 5 (2010), pp. 439-448. 
 
88 Marinko Skare and Małgorzata Porada-rochon, “The Role of Innovation in Sustainable 
Growth: A Dynamic Panel Study on Micro and Macro Levels 1990–2019,” 


--- Page 36 ---
 
36
                                                
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, November 24, 2021, 121337, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.121337. 
 
89 Mirjam Beltrami, Guido Orzes, Joseph Sarkis, and Marco Sartor, “Industry 4.0 and 
Sustainability:  Towards Conceptualization and Theory,” Journal of Cleaner Production, 
vol. 312 (2021), 127733, https://www-sciencedirect-
com.ezprox.bard.edu/science/article/pii/S095965262101951X. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 37 ---
 
37
                                                
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
"Science Summit on World Population:  A Joint Statement by 58 of the World's Scientific 
Academies.”  Population and Development Review, vol. 20, no. 1 (Mar., 1994), pp. 233-
38. 
 
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt.  “Some Thoughts on Capital Accumulation, Innovation, and 
Growth.”  Annals of Economics and Statistics, no. 125/126 (2017), pp. 57–78, 
https://doi.org/10.15609/annaeconstat2009.125-126.0057. 
 
Bassanini, Andrea, Stefano Scarpetta, and Ignazio Visco, “Knowledge, Technology and 
Economic Growth:  Recent Evidence from OECD Countries.”  SSRN Scholarly Paper.  
Rochester, NY:  Social Science Research Network, October 1, 2000, 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.246375. 
 
Beinhocker, Eric D.  The Origin of Wealth:  The Radical Remaking of Economics and What It 
Means for Business and Society.  Boston, Mass: Harvard Business Review Press, 2007. 
 
Beltrami, Mirjam, Guido Orzes, Joseph Sarkis, and Marco Sartor.  “Industry 4.0 and 
Sustainability:  Towards Conceptualization and Theory.”  Journal of Cleaner Production, 
vol. 312 (2021), 127733, https://www-sciencedirect-
com.ezprox.bard.edu/science/article/pii/S095965262101951X. 
 
Bloom, Nicholas,  Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb.  “Are Ideas Getting 
Harder to Find?”  Working Paper. Working Paper Series. National Bureau of Economic 
Research, September 2017, https://doi.org/10.3386/w23782. 
 
Boden, Margaret.  The Creative Mind:  Myths and Mechanisms.  London, New York:  
Routledge, 2004. 
 
Cairns, John.  “The Age of Transition to Sustainability: The End of the Exponential Growth 
Period.”  Politics and the Life Sciences, vol. 20, no. 2 (2001), pp. 131–38. 
 
Cancino, Christian A., Ariel I. La Paz, Arkalgud Ramaprasad, and Thant Syn.  “Technological 
Innovation for Sustainable Growth:  An Ontological Perspective.” Journal of Cleaner 
Production, vol. 179 (April 2018), pp. 31–41, p. 31, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.059.  
 
Carr, Paul H.  “Does God Play Dice?  Insights from the Fractal Geometry of Nature,” Zygon, vol. 
39, no. 4 (December 2003).  
 
Carroll, Sean.  “Is Our Universe Natural?” arXiv:hep-th0512148v1 13 Dec 2005, p. 5 (accessed 
February 21, 2010);  


--- Page 38 ---
 
38
                                                
 
Cohen, Daniel.  The Infinite Desire for Growth.  Princeton:  Princeton University Press, 2018. 
 
Crawford, Jason.  “Exponential Growth Is the Baseline,” The Roots of Progress, February 21, 
2021, https://rootsofprogress.org/exponential-growth-is-the-baseline. 
 
Crawford, Jason.  “Exponential Growth Is the Baseline.”  The Roots of Progress, February 21, 
2021, https://rootsofprogress.org/exponential-growth-is-the-baseline.  
 
Dale, Gareth.  “Economic Growth:  A Short History of a Controversial Idea.”  openDemocracy, 
https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/oureconomy/economic-growth-short-history-
controversial-idea/ (accessed December 16, 2021) 
 
Davenport, Thomas H. and Lawrence Prusak.  “Working Knowledge:  How Organizations 
Manage What They Know.”  Ubiquity: An ACM IT Magazine and Forum (August 1-
August 31, 2000), http://ubiquity.acm.org/article.cfm?id=348775.  
 
Dorfman, Jeffrey.  “Why Growth Matters.”  Forbes, December 22, 2017, 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jeffreydorfman/2017/12/22/why-growth-matters/.  
 
Encyclopedia Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/science/Maxwells-demon). 
 
Fix, Blair.  Rethinking Economic Growth Theory From a Biophysical Perspective.  New York:  
Springer, 2015. 
 
GCSE, Economics (8136), https://filestore.aqa.org.uk/resources/economics/specifications/AQA-
8136-SP-2017.PDF 
 
Georgescu-Roegen, N.  The Entropy Law and the Economic Process.  Cambridge, Mass.:  
Harvard University Press, 1971. 
 
Gilles, Robert P.  “The Principles of Economic Wealth Creation.”  Economic Wealth Creation 
and the Social Division of Labour.  Cham:  Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.  
 
Global Institute of Sustainability and Innovation, Arizona State University.  “The myth of 
infinite growth on a finite planet,” https://sustainability-
innovation.asu.edu/news/archive/the-myth-of-infinite-growth-on-a-finite-planet/. 
 
Hall, J. K., G. A. Daneke, and M. J. Lenox.  “Sustainable development and entrepreneurship:  
past contributions and future directions.”  Journal of Business Ventures, vol. 25, no. 5 
(2010), pp. 439-448. 
 
Harford, Tim.  “Can Economic Growth Continue Forever? Of Course!” Freakonomics (blog), 
January 24, 2014. https://freakonomics.com/2014/01/24/can-economic-growth-continue-
forever-of-course/. 


--- Page 39 ---
 
39
                                                
 
Harford, Tim.  The Undercover Economist Strikes Back: How to Run--or Ruin--an Economy.  
New York:  Riverhead Books, 2015. 
 
Herz, Jonathan.  “The Fairy Tale of Eternal Economic Growth.”  EESI.” October 11, 2019, 
https://www.eesi.org/articles/view/the-fairy-tale-of-eternal-economic-growth (accessed 
December 15, 2021). 
 
Investopedia, October 28, 2021, https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/061615/what-
difference-between-economic-value-and-market-value.asp. 
 
Johansson, S. Ryan.  “Complexity, Morality, and Policy at the Population Summit.”  Population 
and Development Review, vol. 21, no. 2 (1995), pp. 361–86, 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2137499. 
 
Johnston, Matthew.  “Is Infinite Economic Growth on a Finite Planet Possible?” Investopedia, 
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/120515/infinite-economic-growth-finite-
planet-possible.asp (accessed December 15, 2021), 
 
Jones, Christopher F.  “The Delusion and Danger of Infinite Economic Growth.”  The New 
Republic, October 1, 2019. https://newrepublic.com/article/155214/delusion-danger-
infinite-economic-growth.  
 
Jorgenson, Eric.  “Why Value Creation Is the Foundation of Business:  How to Define It, 
Measure It, and Manage It.”  Evergreen Business Fortnightly (blog), September 14, 2015, 
https://medium.com/evergreen-business-weekly/why-value-creation-is-the-foundation-of-
business-how-to-define-it-measure-it-and-manage-it-147c92b87aca. 
 
Kim, K. H.  “Can we trust creativity tests?  A review of the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking 
(TTCT).”  Creativity Research Journal, vol. 18 (2006), pp. 3–14.   
 
Lawson, Tony.  “A Realist Perspective on Contemporary ‘Economic Theory.’”  Journal of 
Economic Issues, vol. 29, no. 1 (1995), pp. 1–32. 
 
Liu, Ying, Wan-Ming Chen, Sheng-Yuan Wang, and Xiao-Lan Wu.  “Sustainable Growth from a 
Factor Dependence and Technological Progress Perspective:  A Case Study of East 
China.” Discrete Dynamics in Nature & Society, September 2, 2021, 1–12, 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/8739442. 
 
Makadok, Richard and Russell Coff.  “The Theory of Value and the Value of Theory: Breaking 
New Ground versus Reinventing the Wheel.”  The Academy of Management Review, vol. 
27, no. 1 (2002), pp. 10–13.  
 
Malthus, T. R.  An Essay on the Principle of Population:  Text, Sources and Background, 
Criticism.  New York:  Norton, 1976. 


--- Page 40 ---
 
40
                                                
 
Market Business News, https://marketbusinessnews.com/financial-glossary/economic-activity/ 
 
Martinez, Fabien, Ken Peattie, and Diego Vazquez-Brust, “Faith in the Future:  On a Mission to 
Integrate Sustainability into Management Theory and Practice.”  Futures, vol. 125 
(January 1, 2021): 102654, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2020.102654. 
. 
Mayer, Melissa.  “What Are Environmental Problems Due to Population Growth?”  Sciencing, 
2018, https://sciencing.com/environmental-problems-due-population-growth-
8337820.html. 
 
Mayer, R. E.  “Fifty years of creativity research.”  In R. J. Sternberg.  Ed.  Handbook of 
creativity (pp. 449–460). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999). 
 
Mbonye, Manasse.  “Constraints on Cosmic Dynamics,” arXiv:gr-qe/0309135v1 30 Sep 
2003,(accessed November 21, 2008). 
 
Mowery, David and Nathan Rosenberg.  Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth.  
Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press, 1989, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511664441. 
 
Neumaier, Arnold.  “Entropy and Knowledge,” 
https://www.mat.univie.ac.at/~neum/physfaq/topics/knowledge.html (accessed December 
31, 2021). 
 
Peretto, Pietro.  “Through Scarcity to Prosperity:  Toward a Theory of Sustainable Growth.”  
Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 117 (January 2021), pp. 243–57. 
 
Piaget, Jean.  The Origins of Intelligence in Children (Madison, Conn.: International Universities 
Press, Inc., 1998). 
 
Piffer, Davide.  “Can Creativity Be Measured? An Attempt to Clarify the Notion of Creativity 
and General Directions for Future Research.”  Thinking Skills and Creativity, vol. 7 
(2012), pp. 258–64.  
 
Pohjola, Matti.  Ed.  Information Technology and Economic Growth:  A Cross-Country Analysis. 
Working Papers WP, 2000. https://doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.295500.  
 
Popkova, Elena G., Paola De Bernardi, Yuliya G. Tyurina, and Bruno S. Sergi.  “A Theory of 
Digital Technology Advancement to Address the Grand Challenges of Sustainable 
Development.”  Technology in Society, vol. 68 (February 1, 2022): 101831, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2021.101831. 
 
Population Summit (1993 : New Delhi, India), and Francis Graham-Smith. Population, the 
Complex Reality :  A Report of the Population Summit of the World’s Scientific 


--- Page 41 ---
 
41
                                                
Academies.  London :  Royal Society;  Golden, Colo. : North American Press, 1994, 
http://archive.org/details/populationcomple00popu;  
 
Prigogine, I. and I. Stengers, Order out of Chaos.  New York:  Bantam Books, 1984.  
 
Roser, Max.  “What Is Economic Growth? And Why Is It so Important?” Our World in Data, 
May 13, 2021, https://ourworldindata.org/what-is-economic-growth. 
 
Sandberg, Maria, Kristian Klockars, and Kristoffer Wilén.  “Green Growth or Degrowth? 
Assessing the Normative Justifications for Environmental Sustainability and Economic 
Growth through Critical Social Theory.”  Journal of Cleaner Production, vol 206 
(January 1, 2019), pp. 133–41, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.09.175. 
 
Shkliarevsky, Gennady.  “ Living a Non-Anthropocentric Future” (September 29, 2021), SSRN, 
September 29, 2021, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3933108 or 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3933108;  
 
Shkliarevsky, Gennady.  “Conservation, Creation, and Evolution:  Revising the Darwinian 
Project.”  Journal of Evolutionary Science, vol. 1, no. 2 (September 25, 2019), pp. 1–30, 
https://doi.org/10.14302/issn.2689-4602.jes-19-2990. 
 
Shkliarevsky, Gennady.  “In Quest for Justice:  Solving the Problem of Inclusion and Equality.”  
SSRN. June 8, 2021, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3862630 or 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3862630 . 
 
Shkliarevsky, Gennady.  “On Order and Randomness:  A View From the Edge of Chaos,” ArXiv 
(April 20, 2011), 
http://search.arxiv.org:8081/paper.jsp?r=1104.4133&qid=1372596301818mix_nCnN_-
392512110&qs=Gennady+Shkliarevsky. 
 
Shkliarevsky, Gennady.  “Revising the Cosmic Story,” SSRN Scholarly Paper.  Rochester, NY:  
Social Science Research Network, December 22, 2020,  
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3753651 
 
Shkliarevsky, Gennady.  “Science and Its Discontents:  Is There an End to Knowing?”   Systems 
Research and Behavioral Science, vol. 30, no. 1 (2013), pp. 43–55.  
 
Shkliarevsky, Gennady.  “Understanding the Process of Creation:  A New Approach.” 
Management:Journal of Sustainable Business and Management Solutions in Emerging 
Economies, vol. 22, no. 3 (October 31, 2017), pp. 1–13, 
https://doi.org/10.7595/management.fon.2017.0021.  
 
Singh, Chirag and Vandana Dhara.  “The Delusion of Infinite Economic Growth.”  Scientific 
American, June 20, 2021, https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-delusion-of-
infinite-economic-growth/. 


--- Page 42 ---
 
42
                                                
Skare, Marinko and Małgorzata Porada-rochon.  “The Role of Innovation in Sustainable Growth:  
A Dynamic Panel Study on Micro and Macro Levels 1990–2019.”  Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, November 24, 2021, 121337, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.121337. 
 
Smil, Vaclav.  “Infinite Growth Is a Pipe Dream.” Financial Times, August 8, 2019. 
https://www.ft.com/content/db0a7be2-b2d2-11e9-b2c2-1e116952691a. 
 
Smil, Vaclav.  Growth:  From Microorganisms to Megacities.  Cambridge, Massachusetts:  The 
MIT Press, 2019. 
 
Solow, Robert.  “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.”  Review of 
Economics and Statistics, vol. 39 (1957), pp. 312-320. 
 
Steinhard, Paul J. and Neil Turok.“  A Cyclic Model of the Universe.”  Science, vol. 296, issue 
5572  [May 24, 2002], pp. 1436-40). 
 
The Roots of Progress.  “Exponential Growth Is the Baseline,” February 21, 2021, 
https://rootsofprogress.org/exponential-growth-is-the-baseline. 
 
Vicsek, Tamas.  “The Bigger Picture.”  Nature, vol. 418 (11 July 2002). 
 
Wapenaar, Kees, and Roel Snieder.  “Determinism:  Chaos Tamed.”  Nature, vol. 447, no. 7145 
(June 7, 2007). 
 
Waters, Oliver.  “The Strange Necessity of Infinite Economic Growth.”  Medium (blog), 
November 14, 2018, https://medium.com/@oliverwaters_76079/the-strange-necessity-of-
infinite-economic-growth-ebc2e505cdf1. 
 
Webber, Alan M.  “What’s So New About the New Economy?”  Harvard Business Review, 
January 1, 1993. https://hbr.org/1993/01/whats-so-new-about-the-new-economy. 
 
Weigle, George.  “False Precision and Population Science.”  Baltimore Sun, September 7, 1994, 
https://www.baltimoresun.com/news/bs-xpm-1994-09-07-1994250032-story.html. 
 
Weil, David N. and Joshua Wilde.  “How Relevant Is Malthus for Economic Development 
Today?”  The American Economic Review, vol. 100, no. 2 (May 2010), pp. 378–82. 
 
Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economy 
 
Wolfram, Steven.  A New Kind of Science.  Champaign, Il.:  Wolfram Media, 2002.  
 
Young, J. T.  “Entropy and Natural Resource Scarcity:  A Reply to the Critics.”   Journal of 
Environmental Economics and Management, vol. 26, no. 2 (March 1994), pp.  210–213. 
 


--- Page 43 ---
 
43
                                                
Young, J. T.  “Is the Entropy law relevant to the economics of natural resource scarcity?” 
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, vol. 21, no. 2 (September 1991), 
pp. 169-179.  
 
